[PERCUSSIVE WORLD MUSIC PLAYING]
Angela Davis: WHAT DO YOU THINK
HAS SUSTAINED YOU IN THE
DECADES OF YOUR ACTIVISM?
I KNOW PEOPLE ALWAYS ASK
ME THE SAME QUESTION AND
I DON'T KNOW IF I REALLY
KNOW HOW TO ANSWER THAT.
Yuri Kochiyama:
YOU ANSWER FIRST.
NO, I WANT TO ASK
YOU THAT QUESTION.
WELL, I THINK THE FIRST
DON'T YOU FEEL, PEOPLE IN
THE MOVEMENT SUSTAIN EACH OTHER.
IT'S BECAUSE THEIR SPIRIT
IS SO CONTAGIOUS AND I THINK WE
-ALL GET, WELL HOOKED.
-BUT I THINK YOU'RE ONE
OF THOSE PEOPLE WHOSE
SPIRIT IS CONTAGIOUS.
[LAUGHS] HEY.
HELLO, HOW ARE YOU?
[KISS] SINCE YOU PUT
ME ON THE SPOT YESTERDAY
AND YOU ASKED ME
WHERE IT ALL BEGAN, AND
OH
YOU ASKED ME ABOUT MY
CHILDHOOD AND GROWING UP
THAT I WOULD DO
THE SAME WITH YOU TODAY.
SO, PERHAPS YOU COULD TELL
ME HOW IT ALL BEGAN.
[♪...]
[CROWD CHEERS]
[CROWD NOISE]
Angela: WE WILL NOT STOP
ORGANIZING
WE WILL NOT STOP DEMONSTRATING
WE WILL NOT STOP MARCHING
WE WILL NOT STOP AGITATING
UNTIL MUMIA ABU JAMAL IS FREE.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS]
WE SAY FREE MUMIA,
BECAUSE HE IS INNOCENT.
BECAUSE HE HAS BEEN TARGETED BY
THE PHILADELPHIA
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
BECAUSE OF HIS OPPOSITION
TO POLICE CRIMES, POLICE
BRUTALITY, POLICE CORRUPTION.
WE ALSO SAY FREE MUMIA
BECAUSE HE IS THE MOST
ELOQUENT OPPONENT OF THE
DEATH PENALTY IN THIS COUNTRY.
[NON-HARMONIC JAZZ MUSIC]
[ANGELA DAVIS' VOICE LOOPS]
[♪...]
YOU WERE SORT OF A
LEGEND FOR ME FOR A LONG
TIME BEFORE WE
ACTUALLY SAW EACH OTHER.
OH, NO I DON'T THINK SO.
NO, I WASN'T
KNOWN AT ALL.[LAUGHS]
OH COME ON. BUT YURI NO,
I WAS LIKE A GROUPIE, GOING TO
YOU KNOW, YOU HAVE
RECEIVED SO MANY AWARDS.
NO, GOING TO ALL
THE PANTHER THINGS.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, DO
YOU REMEMBER THE EVENT
WHERE WE GAVE YOU
AN AWARD FOR THE WORK--
I COULDN'T BELIEVE IT, DID I GET
TO SIT NEXT TO YOU? I THINK SO.
WE SPOKE ON THE SAME PROGRAM.
YEAH.
Yuri: AND WEREN'T YOU
SITTING RIGHT NEXT TO ME
BUT YOU WERE THE ONE
WHO RECEIVED THE AWARD. YOU
WERE DOING
ORGANIZING IN HARLEM.
NO, I DIDN'T BECOME
POLITICAL 'TILL LATE.
I WAS 40.
AND ACTUALLY, I
DIDN'T BECOME POLITICAL
'TILL WE MOVED TO HARLEM.
WELL, WE WERE LUCKY, WE
HEARD THAT THIS PROJECT
WAS OPENING UP AND
THERE WERE TWO CRITERIA'S.
FIRST, INCOME WISE, YOU
HAD TO FIT IN, YOU HAD TO
BE LOW INCOME.
AND SECONDLY, SOMEBODY
IN THE FAMILY HAD TO HAVE A
JOB WITHIN 10-BLOCK
RADIUS OF THE PROJECT.
AND JUST BY SHEER LUCK
MY HUSBAND WAS WORKING FOR
JICUF: JAPAN INTERNATIONAL
CHRISTIAN UNIVERSITY FOUNDATION,
WHOSE OFFICE
WAS ON 23 RD STREET WAS
SUDDENLY MOVED TO 120TH STREET
IN THAT 10-BLOCK RADIUS
OF THE PROJECT IN HARLEM.
AND SO, WE QUALIFIED
AND THAT CHANGED OUR LIFE
BECAUSE, WELL WE
SAID, GEE, WE BETTER LEARN
SOMETHING ABOUT
THE BLACK COMMUNITY,
THE BLACK MOVEMENT AND ALL.
AND LUCKILY TOO, THE
PLACE WHERE THE HARLEM PARENTS
COMMITTEE USED TO MEET AND
WHICH BECAME THE HARLEM
FREEDOM SCHOOL WAS ALMOST
ACROSS THE STREET FROM
WHERE WE LIVED IN THIS NEW
PROJECT CALLED MANHATTANVILLE.
I NEVER EVEN HEARD THE
WORD SLAVERY GROWING UP.
YOU KNOW, EVEN THOUGH YOU
ARE TAKING SOCIAL STUDIES
AND HISTORY,
I DON'T REMEMBER
ANYONE TEACHING US ABOUT THAT.
WHY DO YOU THINK YOU
WERE SO PROFOUNDLY AFFECTED?
Yuri: I KNEW ABOUT THE SOUTH
AND THE RACISM, BUT NOT ONE
BLACK SOLDIER CAME TO OUR USO.
USO'S OPEN TO ANYBODY.
AND I THOUGHT THAT'S
STRANGE, I NEVER SAW A
BLACK PERSON ON THE STREET.
YOU WERE THERE BY YOURSELF?
YEAH.
SO WHAT WAS THAT LIKE,
BEING IN A STRANGE PLACE,
NOT KNOWING ANYONE?
WELL, AT FIRST I LIVED
RIGHT IN THE USO, UNTIL I COULD FIND A PLACE.
I LIVED ON MAIN STREET IN
HATTIESBURG, MISSISSIPPI.
I NEVER SAW A BLACK
PERSON WALK DOWN MAIN STREET.
YOU KNOW, WE GOT OUT OF
THE CAMP AND THEN I WENT
TO NEW YORK AND MY FIRST
JOB WAS CHOCK FULL O'NUTS.
AND ALL THE WORKERS ARE
BLACK EXCEPT FOR THE
MANAGERS WHO ARE WHITE.
AND THERE WERE TWO GUYS
WHO SAID THEY TRAINED AT
CAMP SHELBY
AND WENT OVERSEAS.
THEY WERE LUCKY THEY GOT BACK.
BUT I SAID, "I WANT TO ASK
YOU SOMETHING" AND I SAID,
"WHY DIDN'T ANY BLACK
SOLDIERS COME TO OUR USO?
HATTIESBURG WAS FULL OF
USO, EVERY KIND IN USO."
ONE GUY, THE FIRST GUY
SAID, " WHERE WERE THE USO?"
I SAID, "MOST OF THEM WERE
ON LIKE PINE STREET."
HE SAID, "NO BLACK SOLDIER
COULD WALK ON ANY MAIN DRAG
IN MISSISSIPPI."
AND I SAID, "YOU MEAN,
YOU'RE WEARING YOUR
UNIFORM, YOU'RE TRAINING
TO GO OVERSEAS AND YOU'RE
GONNA GO OVERSEAS AND YOU
CANNOT WALK IN ANY
YOU KNOW, MAIN STREET IN
MISSISSIPPI?" [AIRPLANES ROAR]
I DON'T KNOW.
I DIDN'T KNOW
ABOUT THE REST OF THE
SOUTH, BUT I GUESS MOST OF
THE SOUTH IS THE SAME.
THAT, I THINK BLEW MY MIND,
WHERE I KNEW MY LIFE WAS
GONNA GO IN A
DIFFERENT DIRECTION
'CAUSE I JUST COULDN'T
BELIEVE IT.
Angela: YOU KNOW I THINK
PLACE HAS A LOT TO DO WITH
OH I THINK SO. YES.
POLITICIZATION.
I ACTUALLY DON'T REMEMBER
WHEN MY POLITICAL
CONSCIOUSNESS FIRST DEVELOPED.
YOU WERE VERY YOUNG.
-WELL NO.
-BEFORE?
AND I THINK IT HAD A LOT
TO DO WITH THE FACT THAT
MY MOTHER HAD A LONG
HISTORY ALREADY OF
POLITICAL ACTIVISM.
-OH.
- THAT WE LIVED IN THE MOST
SEGREGATED CITY IN THE
COUNTRY IN BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA.
THAT UM,THE COMMUNITY
OH.     IN WHICH WE LIVED
THE NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE MY
MOTHER AND FATHER MOVED
WHEN I WAS TWO OR
THREE YEARS OLD,
WAS A NEIGHBORHOOD UNDER SIEGE.
BLACK PEOPLE WHO WERE
MOVING INTO THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
WERE UNDER ATTACK
BOTH BY THE KU KLUX KLAN
AND BY THE CITY
GOVERNMENT THAT WAS HEADED
BY BULL CONNOR, THE
INFAMOUS BULL CONNOR.
SO, I THINK I KIND OF GREW
UP WITH A SENSE OF THE
URGENCY OF ENGAGING IN
POLITICAL OPPOSITION.
BECAUSE THAT WAS THE
ONLY WAY TO LIVE.
[DOGS BARKING]
[FIRE HOSES SPRAYING]
Angela: MY FIRST
INVOLVEMENT IN ORGANIZED
FORM, WAS WHEN I
WAS ABOUT 11 OR 12.
GEE. GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
BUT I CAN
REMEMBER BEFORE THAT,
THINKING IN TERMS OF CHANGE.
THAT YOU KNOW, MY MOTHER
USED TO ALWAYS TELL US,
"THIS IS NOT THE WAY
THINGS ARE SUPPOSED TO BE.
BLACK PEOPLE, (OF COURSE
WILL USE THE TERM NEGROES THEN)
ARE NOT INFERIOR.
AND THAT AS A MATTER OF
FACT, ALL WHITE PEOPLE
ARE NOT LIKE THE WHITE
PEOPLE YOU MEET HERE."
MY MOTHER, SHE WAS GETTING
HER MASTERS IN EDUCATION,
SO SHE WOULD TEACH DURING
THE YEAR. THEN SHE WOULD GO
TO NEW YORK TO STUDY
DURING THE SUMMER.
WHEN BEGINNING AROUND
THE TIME I WAS 5 YEARS OLD.
SO, SHE WOULD TAKE THE
CHILDREN TO NEW YORK,
AND WE WERE ABLE TO SEE A VERY
DIFFERENT KIND OF ARRANGEMENT.
UM HUM.
WHICH MEANT THAT WHEN WE
WENT BACK TO THE SOUTH,
WE HAD A SENSE
OF ALTERNATIVES,
THAT SEGREGATION WAS
NOT THE ETERNAL LAW.
[GOSPEL CHOIR HUMMING]
[MALE VOICE NARRATES]
THIS IS A SOUTHERN CITY WHERE
DEPARTMENT STORES REFUSE
LUNCH COUNTER SERVICE
TO NEGRO STUDENTS.
[GOSPEL CHOIR HUMMING]
[BULL CONNOR SPEAKING]
"YOU CAN NEVER WHIP THESE BIRDS
IF YOU DON'T KEEP
YOU AND THEM SEPARATE
I FOUND THAT OUT IN BIRMINGHAM.
YOU'VE GOT TO KEEP THE
WHITE AND THE BLACK SEPARATE."
[CROWD CHEERING]
[MALE PROTESTER'S VOICE]
"TO YOU KNOW THAT YOU AREN'T IN SOME MUD HOLE
TRYING TO FIGHT FOR SOMETHING
AND NOBODY ELSE GIVES A DAMN.
BUT THAT EVERY THAT
YOUR, YOUR FELLOW NEGROES
ARE WITH YOU.
AND THAT MEANS AN AWFUL
LOT TO ANYONE WHO'S FIGHTING
FOR SOMETHING, FOR AN IDEAL."
SO I ALWAYS SAY THAT I
THINK I WAS KIND OF YOU KNOW,
I GREW INTO
MY POLITICAL ACTIVISM.
IT WAS A VERY,
IT WAS NO BIG DEAL.
AND THIS IS JUST SORT
OF THE WAY I FELT,
I HAD TO BE IN THE WORLD.
I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR
EVERYTHING ABOUT YOUR BEGINNING.
AND HOW, YEAH, I MEAN,
START WITH WHAT SCHOOLS
YOU WENT TO, EVEN
WHEN YOU ARE SMALL
COULD YOU START?
OKAY. [LAUGHS]
WELL, I MEAN IT'S
INTERESTING BECAUSE
-MY MOTHER JUST PASSED.
-I HEARD, I'M SORRY.
SO I'VE BEEN THINKING ALOT
AND WE'VE BEEN TALKING ALOT,
ABOUT OUR EARLY CHILDHOOD
MEMORIES IN BIRMINGHAM.
Yuri: WAS HER NAME, DAVIS?
Angela: UMM HMM.
SALLY, SALLY DAVIS.
AND I THINK I GOT A LOT
OF MY ACTIVISM FROM HER.
OH!
BECAUSE SHE WAS
INVOLVED IN THE CAMPAIGN
TO FREE THE SCOTTSBORO NINE.
-OH,REALLY, FROM WAY BACK THERE!
-FROM WAY BACK.
SHE WAS AN ACTIVIST.
JUST AFTER SHE STARTED COLLEGE,
SHE WAS INVOLVED IN THE
SOUTHERN NEGRO YOUTH CONGRESS.
AND SUPPORTING
LABOR STRUGGLES THERE.
WAIT, SHE WAS A
COMMUNIST BACK THEN EVEN?
WELL, SHE NEVER JOINED THE
PARTY, BUT SHE WAS FRIENDS
WITH A LOT OF THE BLACK
COMMUNISTS WHO HAD COME TO
AND THAT'S HOW YOU BECAME?
WELL, YES, SORT OF. [LAUGHS]
THERE'S A CONNECTION.
MY MOTHER WAS INVOLVED IN
ALL OF THOSE STRUGGLES.
Yuri: WOW.
IN THE LATE 20'S, THE EARLY 30'S
INVOLVED IN THE NAACP AS WELL.
SO, IN THE SOUTH IF YOU
WERE A MEMBER OF AN ORGANIZATION
LIKE THE NAACP, IT WAS ASSUMED
THAT YOU WERE A COMMUNIST.
OH!
Angela: [LAUGHS] RIGHT
EVEN THOUGH NAACP
WAS A LOT MILDER. EXACTLY.
BUT IT TAKES SO MUCH
MORE COURAGE YOU KNOW,
WHEN I THINK THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT
MADE COMMUNISM ALMOST
SOMETHING CRIMINAL.
YEAH.
LOOK WHAT HAPPENED TO,
WHAT'S HIS NAME,ROBERT WILLIAMS.
Angela: THAT'S YES,EXACTLY,
EXACTLY. IN NORTH CAROLINA.
I NEVER REALLY MADE
THE CONNECTION BETWEEN
MY ACTIVISM AND HER ACTIVISM,
BUT OBVIOUSLY THE SEEDS
-WERE PLANTED. YOU KNOW
-[LAUGHTER] YEAH.
SHE CONTINUED TO
DO ACTIVIST WORK,
AND WHEN MY SISTER,
WHO WAS ONE OF THE MAJOR,
-FANIA?
-FANIA WAS ONE OF THE
MAJOR FIGURES IN THE CAMPAIGN.
SHE GOT PREGNANT AND HAD HER
-BABY, WHILE I WAS IN JAIL.
-OH REALLY?
YEAH [LAUGHS].
AND SO, SHE GAVE
THE BABY TO MY MOTHER,
AND SHE CONTINUED TO
TRAVEL ALL OVER THE WORLD.
Yuri: OH! TRAVELED
WITH YOU. OH, AH.
I WAS IN JAIL, SHE WAS
TRAVELING ON MY BEHALF
AND THEN MY MOTHER WAS
TRAVELING WITH THE BABY.
-OH GOSH!
-[LAUGHTER] SO, THAT WAS
THREE GENERATIONS
OF ACTIVISM RIGHT THERE.
-WOW.
-YEAH.
[TRADITIONAL JAPANESE
MUSIC PLAYING]
Yuri: I WAS THE ONLY ONE HOME.
MY BROTHERS AND
MY MOTHER WERE ELSEWHERE.
AND I WAS SO SURPRISED, MY
FATHER HAD JUST COME BACK
FROM THE HOSPITAL THE
DAY BEFORE. HE HAD SURGERY.
IT WAS, I DON'T KNOW,AROUND
11 O'CLOCK IN THE MORNING,
SUNDAY IT WAS.
AH, I DIDN'T KNOW WHO THEY
WERE, BUT AS SOON AS THEY
KNOCKED ON THE DOOR
AND I OPENED THE DOOR.
THEY PUT UP THEIR,I DON'T KNOW,
ID THAT THEY WERE FROM THE FBI.
AND THEN THEY ASKED WHERE
MY FATHER WAS AND I SAID,
"WELL HE'S SLEEPING.
HE'S NOT FEELING WELL."
BUT THEY JUST WENT IN,
TOLD HIM TO PUT ON HIS
SLIPPERS AND BATHROBE
AND THEY TOOK HIM OUT.
AND THEN, I CALLED
MY MOTHER AND SAID,
"COME HOME RIGHT AWAY, THREE
PEOPLE JUST TOOK POP SOMEWHERE."
WE DIDN'T KNOW WHERE.
[SCREAMING AND BOMBS EXPLODING]
Angela: THAT WAS DECEMBER 07,1941?
Yuri: '41. UM HMM.
BY THAT EVENING, I MEAN IT WAS
IN ALL THE NEWSPAPER'S HEADLINE,
"PEARL HARBOR BOMBED"
AND ALL THAT.
AND SO, ALL OF US
JAPANESE-AMERICANS WERE
CALLING UP EACH OTHER:
"DID THE FBI'S COME YET
TO YOUR PLACE AND ALL THAT.
AND I WONDER WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN TO US?"
BECAUSE THE FEELING ON THE
WEST COAST WAS VERY, VERY,
-WHAT'S THE RIGHT WORD?
-PARANOID?
-YEAH, PARANOID, YEAH.
-FEARFUL?
Yuri: YEAH, A LOT OF FEAR AND
HATE AND ALL.
Angela: DO YOU KNOW WHY THEY
SPECIFICALLY
TARGETED YOUR FATHER?
Yuri: SINCE HE SUPPLIED FISH
TO JAPANESE STEAM SHIP LINES,
HE USED TO ALSO MEET ALL
OF THESE CAPTAINS AND HE
WOULD TAKE THEM, USUALLY
IT WAS ALWAYS TO A GOLF COURSE.
BUT THE FBI SAID HE WAS
TAKING THEM ON HIGHWAYS
WHERE THERE WERE
MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.
THERE WERE NO MILITARY
INSTALLATIONS THEN.
AND HE WAS JUST TAKING
THEM TO THE GOLF COURSES,
'CAUSE THEY JUST NEEDED SOMEONE,
THEY COULDN'T SPEAK ENGLISH.
THEY NEEDED JUST A
JAPANESE SPEAKING PERSON WHO
WOULD BE BE LIKE A CHAUFFEUR.
BUT THEY SAID THEY HAD
THAT EARLY?
BEEN WATCHING HIM FOR 20 YEARS.
IN THIS SMALL, I MEAN AND HE
THE FIRST ONE IN OUR TOWN.
THERE WERE MANY
JAPANESE IN OUR TOWN WHO
WERE PICKED UP RIGHT AWAY. THEY
WERE PICKED UP A LITTLE LATER.
'CAUSE EVENTUALLY ,
ALL FISHERMEN WERE PICKED UP.
[EERIE INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
EVERYTHING HAPPENED
FAST AFTER THAT.
I MEAN, MY FATHER
DIED SIX WEEKS LATER.
IT WAS JANUARY 21 ST.
AND THEN, BY APRIL 1ST THE WORD
WAS OUT THAT ALL PEOPLE OF
JAPANESE BACKGROUND WOULD BE
UPROOTED AND EVACUATED.
[MALE VOICE NARRATES]
"LAND THAT HAD NEVER BEEN OCCUPIED OR FARMED
WERE CHOSEN FOR MOST OF THE
RELOCATION CENTERS IN UNSETTLED
PARTS OF CALIFORNIA, ARIZONA,
UTAH, IDAHO, WYOMING, COLORADO
AND ARKANSAS. MOST OF THE LAND
WAS COVERED WITH DESERT GROWTH
OR WITH TIMBER IN THE CASE
OF THE ARKANSAS CENTERS.
THEIR EVACUATION DID NOT
IMPLY INDIVIDUAL DISLOYALTY.
TWO-THIRDS OF THE EVACUEES ARE
AMERICAN CITIZENS BY RIGHT OF
BIRTH. THE REST ARE THEIR
JAPANESE BORN PARENTS AND
GRANDPARENTS. THEY ARE GUARDED
BY MILITARY POLICE,
SYMBOLS OF THE MILITARY
NATURE OF THE EVACUATION."
WE CALLED THEM
CONCENTRATION CAMPS.
THEY WERE CALLED
INTERNMENT CAMPS
AND EVERYBODY WAS TAKEN.
THEY TOLD US WE CANNOT
TAKE ANYTHING THAT
COULD BE USED AS A WEAPON. SO,
WE COULD TAKE SPOONS,
BUT I DON'T THINK WE
COULD TAKE FORKS OR KNIVES.
WE HAD NO IDEA WHETHER
IT'S ONLY GOING TO BE FOR
A COUPLE OF WEEKS AND
THEY'LL LET US COME BACK.
OR IT MIGHT BE
A COUPLE OF YEARS.
WE FIRST ALL WENT INTO AN
ASSEMBLY CENTER FOR ABOUT
SEVEN MONTHS UNTIL THE CAMPS
WERE BUILT. AND BY OCTOBER,
ALL OF US WERE IN WHAT THEY
CALLED INTERNMENT CAMP.
BUT ALL THE JAPANESE-AMERICANS
CALLED IT CONCENTRATION CAMP.
OF COURSE IT WAS NOTHING LIKE
THE ONES THAT THE JEWS WENT
INTO, BUT WE FELT THE JEWS
WERE SENT TO DEATH CAMP.
[WIND BLOWING]
Angela Davis: AND YOUR FAMILY WENT TO ARKANSAS?
Yuri: RIGHT. UMM HMM.
Angela: WHAT WAS IT LIKE LIVING
IN THE CAMPS AT THAT TIME?
Yuri: WELL, YOU KNOW,
WE ALL LIVED IN BARRACKS,
WE ALL ATE IN A MESS HALL. AND
THEN THEY HAD WHAT THEY CALLED
BLACK HOUSES.
IT'S WHERE MEN AND LADIES,
WHAT DO YOU CALL, WOMEN,
ALSO WHERE WE COULD TAKE BATHS.
Angela: THEY CALLED
THEM BLACK HOUSES?
YEAH, I DON'T KNOW WHY.
BECAUSE THERE WAS NOTHING,
[LAUGHTER] BUT BECAUSE
THE BUILDINGS WERE BLACK, IT WAS
TAR PAPER OR I DON'T KNOW WHAT.
Angela: I SEE.
Yuri: AND SO ,BUT THE
ONE THING THEY SAID,
"EVERYBODY UNDER 18 HAS TO
REGISTER FOR SCHOOL.
ANYBODY OVER 18 HAS TO
CHOOSE SOME KIND OF WORK."
WELL I PICKED NURSE'S AIDE.
Angela: SO, HOW
OLD WERE YOU THEN?
-20.
-YOU WERE 20.
AND I REALLY ENJOYED
DOING THAT KIND OF WORK.
I THINK I WOULD HAVE
WANTED TO GO TO NURSING SCHOOL,
I THOUGHT.
FOR THE DURATION OF THE WAR,
JAPANESE-AMERICANS WERE IN CAMP.
BUT THE LAST YEAR WE WERE
IN THERE, THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
SAID, IF ANY JAPANESE-
AMERICAN COULD GET A JOB,
THEY COULD NOT
GO TO THE WEST COAST,
BUT THEY COULD GO ANYWHERE IN
MID-AMERICA AND GET A JOB,
IF THEY WOULD BE HIRED.
SO, WHERE DID YOU
GO WHEN YOU LEFT THE CAMPS?
WAIT, IN CAMP I MET
A GUY, [LAUGHS] WHO I FELL
-IN LOVE WITH.
-YES.
I WANTED TO GET MARRIED
TO HIM VERY MUCH AND
I THOUGHT EVERYTHING WAS
SET, AND JUST BEFORE THE 442
LEFT FOR OVERSEAS,
YOU KNOW, FOR EUROPE.
MY MOTHER GOT A PERMIT TO
BE AT THE WEDDING AND STUFF,
AND THEN, JUST AS WE
WERE GETTING MARRIED,
THE CHAPLAIN SAYS,
"I JUST RECEIVED A TELEGRAM."
AND HE SAID "I'M SORRY,
BUT BILL'S FATHER SAID
'I CAN NEVER PERMIT THIS, I
DON'T EVEN KNOW WHO SHE IS.'"
AND I WAS JUST SO
SHOCKED AND HURT.
AND THEN THE CHAPLAIN SAID,
"LOOK, ALL THE WOMEN, THE WIVES
WHO ARE HERE WITH THEIR
HUSBANDS, THEY'RE ALL GOING BACK
TO CAMP OR WHERE EVER THEY'RE
GOING TO GO." BUT HE SAID, "WE
DON'T HAVE ANYONE TO RUN THE
USO, THE JAPANESE-AMERICAN USO."
SO,I STAYED THERE
FOR A YEAR AND A HALF.
AFTER ALL THE GUYS LEFT
AND ALL THEIR WIVES WENT
BACK TO CAMP, I DIDN'T
WANT TO GO BACK TO CAMP.
I GOT A JOB,
I THINK IN MINNESOTA.
SO, WERE YOU WITH YOUR
HUSBAND BILL THEN OR WAS HE...
WELL, HE WENT OVERSEAS.
HE WAS STILL OVERSEAS?
YEAH.
SO YOU WENT BY YOURSELF TO
MINNESOTA?
RIGHT, YEAH.
AND THEN WHEN THE WAR
FINALLY WAS OVER, WELL, I
WAS BACK IN
MY HOMETOWN WITH MY MOTHER
AND MY OLDER BROTHER
WHO DIDN'T GET IN THE ARMY.
Angela: WAIT,THEY HAVE MOVED
BACK TO SAN PEDRO
YES, AND IT WAS SO STRANGE
GOING BACK, PEOPLE WERE ASKING,
"WHERE DID YOU GO?"
I MEAN, SO THEY
SO THEY WERE TOTALLY
UNAWARE OF WHAT WAS HAPPENING?
UNAWARE.
YEAH,"SO WHAT DID YOU
DO DURING THE WAR?"
AND I SAID, "NO JAPANESE-
AMERICAN COULD LIVE HERE."
AND I GUESS THEY DIDN'T KNOW.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE TAUGHT
ABOUT, WHAT IS IT?
FREEDOM, JUSTICE AND WHAT?
FREEDOM, JUSTICE AND WHAT,
EQUALITY OR SOMETHING?
EQUALITY, DEMOCRACY
AND ALL OF THAT.
[LAUGHTER] YEAH, AND I
ALWAYS BELIEVED IT.
AND WHAT A GREAT COUNTRY THIS
WAS AND THEN I STARTED THINKING,
WAIT A MINUTE.
WELL I STARTED TO SEE AMERICA
QUITE, QUITE DIFFERENTLY.
MY MOTHER AND FATHER
BOUGHT THEIR FIRST HOUSE,
IT WAS THEIR ONLY HOUSE.
[LAUGHS] WE STILL
OWN THE HOUSE NOW.
AND IT WAS IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT WAS
RIGHT ON THE EDGE OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD ZONED
-FOR WHITE PEOPLE ONLY.
-UH-HUH.
SO WHERE WE LIVED, BLACK
PEOPLE WERE ALLOWED TO
LIVE ON ONE SIDE OF THE
STREET, BUT WE WERE NOT
ALLOWED TO LIVE OR EVEN WALK ON
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE STREET.
Yuri: OH MY GOODNESS.
SO, YOU KNOW, GROWING UP
UNDER THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES
MADE US REALLY AWARE OF, YOU
KNOW,THE MEANING OF SEGREGATION.
MY EARLIEST INVOLVEMENT
WAS WHEN I WAS 11 YEARS OLD
AND I BECAME
-OH 11.
-YEAH.
[LAUGHTER] AND WHAT WAS
THE ISSUE?
IT WAS, WE FORMED AN
INTERRACIAL DISCUSSION GROUP
-FOR YOUNG, YOU KNOW,FOR KIDS.
-INTERRACIAL?
A CHILDREN'S INTERRACIAL
DISCUSSION GROUP.
IN THE SOUTH?
YES, YES.
AND WE MET AT MY MOTHER'S CHURCH
OUR CHURCH,THE SAME CHURCH WHERE
WE ARE HAVING HER MEMORIAL. AND
AS A RESULT OF OUR MEETINGS,
THEY BURNED THE CHURCH. THEY
BURNED A PORTION OF THE CHURCH.
OH MY GOD!
YEAH, SO I GUESS YOU MIGHT
SAY IT WAS BAPTISM BY FIRE.
[LAUGHS] WOW, JEEZ!
YEAH.
WAIT, WHAT PART OF ALABAMA?
BIRMINGHAM.
OH, "BOMBINGHAM" RIGHT.
[LAUGHTER] I KNOW IN MY
AUTO-BIOGRAPHY I DESCRIBED
THE FACT THAT SOME OF MY
EARLIEST MEMORIES ARE THE
SOUNDS OF BOMBS GOING OFF.
BECAUSE WHENEVER BLACK
PEOPLE WOULD TRY TO BUY
ONE OF THE HOUSES ACROSS
THE STREET, THE KU KLUX KLAN
WOULD COME AND EITHER BURN
THE HOUSE OR BOMB THE HOUSE.
AND THEN AT THAT TIME,
THE CITY GOVERNMENT WAS RUN
-BY BULL CONNOR.
-OH.
AND YOU REMEMBER
BULL CONNOR, RIGHT?
YEAH.
SO, BULL CONNOR WOULD GET
IN ON THE RADIO AND WOULD
SAY SOMETHING LIKE HE
WOULD USE YOU KNOW, THE
OTHER WORD, "MOVED IN ON
CENTER STREET AND THERE WILL BE
BLOODSHED TONIGHT,"
OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
WOW.
AND SURE ENOUGH,
THE BOMB WOULD GO OFF AND
OH MY GOSH!
YEAH, YEAH.
SO I THINK THAT GROWING UP
UNDER THOSE CONDITIONS AND
HAVING MY MOTHER AND
FATHER EXPLAIN TO US WHAT
WAS GOING ON, BUT ALSO
HAVING THEM EMPHASIZE TO
US OVER AND OVER AGAIN
THAT THIS WAS NOT THE WAY
THINGS WERE SUPPOSED TO BE.
UMM HMM.
THAT THEY COULD CHANGE.
THAT WASN'T THE
CHURCH THAT THE FOUR...
Angela: NO. NO?
THE CHURCH I'M REFERRING TO IS
THE FIRST CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
AND THE FOUR GIRLS WERE KILLED
AT THE 60TH
STREET BAPTIST CHURCH.
Yuri: OH, YEAH BAPTIST CHURCH.
WHICH RIGHT NOW IS RIGHT
ACROSS THE STREET FROM THE
BIRMINGHAM CIVIL
RIGHTS INSTITUTE
[GOSPEL MUSIC PLAYING]
AMAZING GRACE,
HOW SWEET IT DOES SOUND .
THAT SAVED A SOUL LIKE ME.
Yuri: BUT, I ALSO REMEMBER THE
MONTGOMERY, YOU KNOW, BUS
Angela: YES, THAT'S RIGHT, THE
MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT WHICH IS
Yuri: SO YOU WERE
THERE TOO, I GUESS.
Angela: YEAH, I WAS, IN 1955
I WAS STILL IN BIRMINGHAM.
I LEFT IN 1959.
Yuri: OH.
Angela: TO GO TO HIGH SCHOOL
IN NEW YORK.
WHAT HIGH SCHOOL?
I NEVER KNEW THAT.
YEAH, THIS WAS A SCHOOL, IS A
SCHOOL IN GREENWICH VILLAGE.
[JAZZ MUSIC PLAYING]
[MAN SPEAKING]
"YOU SHOULD LEARN EVERYTHING YOU
CAN IN SCHOOL AND THEN COME OUT
OUT AND USE IT AGAINST THEM."
I WENT ON AN EXCHANGE PROGRAM
THAT WAS ESTABLISHED BY
THE AMERICAN FRIENDS SERVICE
COMMITTEE, THE QUAKERS.
OH.
I LIVED WITH A FAMILY IN
BROOKLYN, IN BEDFORD-STUYVESANT.
AND THE MAN WAS A MINISTER,
REV. WILLIAM HOWARD MELISH.
-HE IS...
-IS HE BLACK OR WHITE?
HE WAS WHITE.
HE AND HIS FATHER WERE
MINISTERS AT THE LARGEST
EPISCOPALIAN CHURCH IN THE AREA,
IT WAS IN BROOKLYN HEIGHTS.
Yuri: UMM HMM.
AND BECAUSE THEY WERE ACTIVE IN
THE SOVIET-AMERICAN FRIENDSHIP
-SOCIETY,
-OH. UH-HUH.
THE DIOCESE TOOK THE
CHURCH FROM THEM, BECAUSE
WHEN I ARRIVED IN 1959 THE
CHURCH HAD BEEN COMPLETELY
SHUT DOWN AND THEY WERE
DOING SERVICES IN OTHER PLACES.
OH.
SO THEY WERE THE TARGET OF
QUITE A BIT OF ANTI-COMMUNISM.
I LIVED WITH THAT FAMILY AND
WENT TO HIGH SCHOOL IN THE
-VILLAGE.
-ELISABETH IRWIN.
IT'S INTERESTING,
ISN'T IT, THAT WE BOTH
HAVE ALL OF THESE
CONNECTIONS WITH NEW YORK?
OF COURSE, YOU HAVE SPENT
MANY MORE YEARS IN NEW
YORK THAN I DID, BUT I WAS
THERE DOING SOME OF THE
YEARS YOU SPOKE ABOUT IN
THE LATE 50'S EARLY 60'S.
AND I WAS ALSO THERE IN 1970.
IN AUGUST OF 1970, WHEN I
WAS ARRESTED IN NEW YORK.
AND I WAS TAKEN TO THE
WOMEN'S HOUSE OF DETENTION
WHICH AT THAT TIME
WAS LOCATED IN THE HEART OF
-GREENWICH VILLAGE.
-OH REALLY? UH HUH.
SO YOU HAD ASKED ME WHO
ELSE WAS ARRESTED IN THAT
AND TAKEN TO THAT JAIL.
I KNOW WHEN THE NEW YORK
21, YOU REMEMBER THE CASE
OF THE NEW YORK 21 AND
AFENI SHAKUR?
Yuri: AFENI SHAKUR.
AFENI WAS IN THAT JAIL,
NOT WHEN I WAS THERE, BUT
I KNEW THAT SHE HAD BEEN THERE.
Yuri: OH.
AND THAT'S WHERE
BILLIE HOLIDAY WAS TAKEN
Yuri: REALLY?
WHEN SHE WAS ARRESTED.
BEFORE THEY TOOK HER TO ALDERSON
[GASPS] 'CAUSE BILLIE
HOLIDAY WAS IN ALDERSON AT
THE SAME TIME THAT
LOLITA LEBRON WAS IN ALDERSON.
Yuri: REALLY?
AND PERHAPS WHEN YOU WERE
WRITING TO LOLITA LEBRON
IN ALDERSON, VIRGINIA.
Yuri: OH, MY GOODNESS.
SO THERE ARE
A LOT OF, YOU KNOW,
VERY INTERESTING CONNECTIONS.
AND SPEAKING OF BILLIE HOLIDAY
DID YOU KNOW HER?
NO, I NEVER MET HER,
I LOVED HER MUSIC
I ABSOLUTELY ADORE HER.
[BILLIE HOLIDAY'S
"STRANGE FRUIT" PLAYING]
BUT I DID GO TO HIGH
SCHOOL WITH THE CHILDREN
OF ETHEL AND
JULIUS ROSENBERG.
Yuri: REALLY?
AND THEY WERE ADOPTED BY A MAN
WHOSE NAME WAS ABE MEEROPOL.
Yuri: OH YEAH, MEEROPOL.
AND HE WAS THE ONE WHO
WROTE "STRANGE FRUIT,"
WHICH WAS PERFORMED
BY BILLIE HOLIDAY.
SO THERE ARE -- ALL OF
THESE REALLY AMAZING --
OH! MY GOODNESS!
-- CONNECTIONS THAT
ONE WOULD NEVER IMAGINE.
[SWING MUSIC PLAYING]
SO HOW DID YOU
AND YOUR HUSBAND BILL
DECIDE TO MOVE TO HARLEM?
NEW YORK PUT A LOT OF
MONEY TO BUILD HOUSING FOR
THE SOLDIERS WHO
WERE COMING BACK.
Angela: HOUSING PROJECTS.
ONE PROJECT AFTER ANOTHER
CAME UP.
FIRST WE GOT INTO
THE ONE IN MID-TOWN.
WE HAD SIX KIDS THEN AND
WE HEARD THAT THERE WAS
ONE OPENING IN HARLEM.
AND SO, YOU COULD IMAGINE
THE THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
WHO SIGNED UP FOR
THE ONE IN HARLEM.
AND I THINK BECAUSE THE
HOUSING DEPARTMENT DIDN'T
WANT THAT HOUSE TO BECOME
SUDDENLY JUST ALL BLACK --
I SEE.
WE GOT INTO
THE HARLEM ONE.
[CHILDREN PLAYING]
Yuri: I WAS SO HAPPY [LAUGHS].
I MEAN, YOU KNOW,
HERE I AM IN HARLEM.
AND THEN OF COURSE BY THEN
MALCOLM X WAS FAMOUS AND YOU
KNOW WITH THE HOPES I WONDERED
IF I'LL EVER GET TO MEET
OH, YOU ACTUALLY
WONDERED WHETHER
YOU WOULD ACTUALLY MEET?
OH YEAH.
SO THIS IS THE EARLY
60'S WE ARE TALKING ABOUT?
Yuri: YEAH.
-ABOUT 1960, 61?
-YEAH, UH-HUH.
AND WE LIVED IN
MANHATTANVILLE, WHICH IS
ON 126TH AND BROADWAY AND
IT GOES THROUGH AMSTERDAM
AND 131ST WHICH IS SUCH A
PERFECT PLACE THAT IT'S
NOT FAR WHERE THERE'S
ALL KINDS OF EVENTS.
WELL AFTER HEARING SOME OF
THE BEST SPEAKERS I'VE
EVER HEARD IN MY LIFE
Angela: SO YOU WENT TO A LOT OF
THE LITTLE, THE STREET RALLIES
-THAT HAPPENED IN HARLEM?
-OH YEAH, YES THE STREET RALLIES
AND I WENT TO ALL THE
DEMONSTRATION MARCHES AND
I'D TAKE MY LITTLE ONES.
I THINK NEW YORK CITY WAS
VERY, VERY WRAPPED UP IN
THE CIVIL RIGHTS
MOVEMENT IN THE SOUTH.
YOU KNOW WHEN THE CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT JUST FIRST
STARTED AND YOU
KNOW THEY HAD THOSE
-FREEDOM RIDES.
-FREEDOM RIDES, YES.
AND EVERY TIME A GROUP
WOULD COME BACK WE WOULD
HOLD A MEETING
AT OUR PLACE.
Angela: WHO CAME
TO THE MEETINGS?
Yuri: JUST NEIGHBORHOOD PEOPLE.
I MEAN IT WAS EYE-OPENING
TO MOST OF US WHO HAD NO
IDEA WHAT BLACKS
HAD GONE THROUGH.
[FIRE CRACKLING] IN 1963
ONE OF THE BIGGEST THINGS
IN HARLEM WAS THE FIGHT
FOR JOBS FOR BLACKS AND
PUERTO RICANS IN
CONSTRUCTION WORK.
THERE WERE SO MANY
CONSTRUCTION THINGS GOING ON.
THEY WERE
HIRING ONLY WHITES.
THEN EVERYDAY DURING
THE SUMMER OF '63
[TRUCK RUMBLES] [SINGING
AND CLAPPING]
...HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE WENT
TO BROOKLYN WHERE THEY
WERE BUILDING THAT -
I THINK IT WAS A HOSPITAL?
AND ALL THESE PEOPLE
WOULD GO THERE TO STOP THE
TRUCKS SO THEY COULDN'T
BUILD THAT HOSPITAL.
AND THEY STILL WOULDN'T
HIRE BLACKS OR PUERTO RICANS.
BY SEPTEMBER ABOUT 700
PEOPLE WERE ARRESTED.
MANY WERE ARRESTED FOUR
AND FIVE TIMES, BECAUSE WE,
YOU KNOW WE WOULD RUN
OUT OF PEOPLE EVENTUALLY.
-AND THEN...
-SO YOU PARTICIPATED
-IN THE DEMONSTRATIONS?
-OH YEAH.
I WAS INVOLVED IN THE
HARLEM WOMEN'S GROUP
-HEADED BY MAE MALLORY.
-OH YES.
-DID YOU KNOW HER?
-YES I KNEW, YEAH.
-SHE WAS WONDERFUL.
-SHE WAS AMAZING.
SHE LIVED IN A PROJECT RIGHT
NEAR THE PROJECT WE LIVED IN.
MAE MALLORY'S GROUP AND
FIGHT BACK WORKED TOGETHER
QUITE A BIT.
"I WANT TO TALK TO BLACK
PEOPLE ACROSS THIS COUNTRY.
THERE ARE FOUR
THINGS WE HAVE TO DO.
NUMBER ONE WE HAVE TO STOP
BEING ASHAMED OF BEING
BLACK." [CROWD CHEERS]
"NUMBER
TWO, WE HAVE TO MOVE INTO
A POSITION WHERE WE CAN
DEFINE TERMS FOR WHAT WE
WANT THEM TO BE, NOT WHAT
RACIST WHITE SOCIETY WANTS
US TO BE.
WE HAVE TO MOVE TO A
POSITION WHERE WE CAN FEEL
STRENGTH AND UNITY AMONGST
EACH OTHER FROM WATTS TO
HARLEM WHERE WE WON'T EVER
BE AFRAID."
[CROWD CHEERS] "AND THE
LAST THING WE HAVE TO DO
IS TO BUILD A POWER BASE
SO STRONG IN THIS COUNTRY
THAT WE'LL BRING THEM TO
THEIR KNEES EVERY TIME
THEY MESS WITH US."
[CROWD CHEERS] Angela: SO WE
WERE ALSO TALKING ABOUT SOME OF
OUR MUTUAL FRIENDSHIPS AND
ACQUAINTANCES WITHIN THE
MOVEMENT AND YOU ASKED ME
ABOUT STOKELY CARMICHAEL,
KWAME TOURE.
HE WAS MY INTRODUCTION TO
THE MOVEMENT IN LOS ANGELES.
UH-HUH.
I HAD BEEN INVOLVED WITH
ANTI-VIETNAM WAR MOVEMENT.
IN FRANKFURT I WAS
INVOLVED IN THE SOCIALIST
-STUDENT ORGANIZATION.
-OH.
AND OF COURSE THE BLACK
PANTHER PARTY HAD JUST
BEEN FOUNDED IN 1966, THIS
WAS 1967, ALL KIND OF
THINGS WERE HAPPENING, BUT
I HAD NO ENTRANCE INTO THE
MOVEMENT.
AND THIS IS HOW I ENDED UP
GETTING INVOLVED IN THE
ORGANIZATION WHICH WE CALL
LOS ANGELES SNCC, THE
-STUDENT NONVIOLENT
COORDINATING COMMITTEE. -OH!
BUT SNCC NOT IN THE SOUTH,
BUT IN LOS ANGELES.
OH, LA SNCC.
-AND THAT WAS HOW I MET
JAMES FOREMAN. -OH!
BECAUSE OF COURSE JAMES
FOREMAN WAS ONE OF THE
-MAJOR FIGURES IN SNCC.
-YES! UH HUH.
OF COURSE STOKELY AND
THEN I MET RAP BROWN THEN.
BUT THESE WERE PEOPLE WHO,
SOME OF WHOM HAD ACTUALLY
GONE TO THE SOUTH, BUT
OTHERS WHO WANTED TO BUILD
A MOVEMENT THAT WOULD
ATTRACT YOUNG PEOPLE IN
CALIFORNIA.
SORT OF, NOT EXACTLY A
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, BUT
A MOVEMENT FOR JUSTICE,
EQUALITY, FOR A LIBERATION
MOVEMENT.
[FAST-PACED, PERCUSSIVE
MUSIC PLAYING]
[SIRENS]
[GUNSHOTS]
[MUSIC CONTINUES]
Angela: SO HOW DID YOU
GET INVOLVED WITH MAX
STANFORD?
OH YEAH, WELL MAX STANFORD
LOVED [LAUGHS] ONE OF THE
GUYS THAT MY DAUGHTER
WAS IN LOVE WITH.
DO YOU KNOW A GUY
NAMED ALKAMAL DUNCAN?
Angela: HIS NAME
SOUNDS FAMILIAR.
YEAH, MAX STANFORD NAMED
ALKAMAL TO BE HEAD OF THE,
YOU KNOW THE JUNIOR GROUP.
WHAT WAS IT CALLED?
RAM HAD A -
THE REVOLUTIONARY
ACTION MOVEMENT.
YEAH. BUT THERE WAS A
JUNIOR GROUP OF RAM AND MAX
STANFORD ASKED
ALKAMAL TO HEAD IT.
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS OF
PEOPLE IMMEDIATELY STARTED
TO JOIN.
LIVING IN HARLEM YOU GET
TO LEARN LITTLE THIS AND
THAT ABOUT BLACK LIFE THAT
I DON'T THINK WE WOULD
HAVE KNOWN IF WE WERE JUST
LIVING, YOU KNOW, WITH A
LOT OF JAPANESE-AMERICANS
OR MIXED GROUPS.
WHAT DREW YOU TO
RADICAL ACTIVISM?
BECAUSE AN ORGANIZATION
LIKE THE REVOLUTIONARY
ACTION MOVEMENT WAS
CONSIDERED REALLY RADICAL.
OH YES!
SO WHAT DO YOU THINK DREW
YOU TO, YOU KNOW,
REVOLUTIONARY
FORMS OF ACTIVISM?
YOU KNOW RAM STARTED
BEFORE PANTHERS.
THAT'S RIGHT.
-A FEW YEARS BEFORE '61
-THAT'S RIGHT, BECAUSE THE
-PANTHERS WERE
-FOUNDED IN 1966.
RIGHT.
AND RAM WAS AS I THINK
'61. -YES.
AND MAX STANFORD WAS A
CLOSE FRIEND OF OUR FAMILY
ANYWAY AND THEN MY
DAUGHTER AICHI, WHO'S GONE
NOW, WELL SHE AND ALKAMAL
WERE TIGHT.
I SEE.
AND SO WE -- THE BIG
DIFFERENCE RAM AND
PANTHERS IS THAT PANTHERS,
YOU KNOW, WAS AN OPEN
GROUP.
YOU KNOW COMMUNITY GROUP.
RAM WAS UNDERGROUND.
SO MOST PEOPLE NEVER HEARD
ABOUT RAM RIGHT.
BUT I'M SO GLAD [LAUGHS]
WE HAD SOME CONNECTIONS
THERE.
AND THE MORE I LEARNED
ABOUT BLACK'S HISTORY AND
THEN ON MY OWN, READING
ABOUT SLAVERY WHICH IS
CERTAINLY THE MOST
INHUMANE THING THAT
HAPPENED!
AND I TOOK A CLASS WITH
HAROLD CRUSE.
OH YOU DID?
YES! OH INTERESTING.
[LAUGHS] I MEAN HAROLD
CRUSE!
AND YOU KNOW HIS BOOK,
WHAT WAS IT?
"THE CRISIS OF THE NEGRO
INTELLECTUAL." RIGHT!
I MEAN LOT OF BLACK
STUDIES, IF THEY WERE
HEADED BY -- STILL BY
WHITES, THEY WOULDN'T LET
THE STUDENTS READ THAT
BOOK.
THAT'S TRUE, THAT TRUE.
SO WHERE WAS HE TEACHING
WHEN YOU TOOK THE COURSE?
BARAKA HAD STATED BLACK
ARTS MOVEMENT.
YES.
IT BECAME LIKE THE BIGGEST
THING IN HARLEM AND THE
PERSON HE CHOSE TO TEACH
BLACK HISTORY WAS HAROLD CRUSE.
"WE WANT FREEDOM BY ANY
MEANS NECESSARY."
[APPLAUSE] [MALCOLM X] "WE
WANT JUSTICE BY ANY MEANS
NECESSARY.
WE WANT EQUALITY BY ANY
MEANS NECESSARY."
"A HUNDRED YEARS AGO THEY
USED TO PUT ON A WHITE
SHEET AND USED A
BLOODHOUND AGAINST
NEGROES, TODAY THEY'VE
TAKEN OFF THE WHITE SHEET
AND PUT ON POLICE UNIFORM,
THEY'VE TRADED IN THE
BLOODHOUNDS FOR POLICE
DOGS AND THEY'RE STILL
DOING THE SAME THING.
ANY KIND OF RACE THAT YOU
CAN THINK WHEN IT COMES TO
DEFENDING HIMSELF, BLACK
PEOPLE SHOULD HAVE, WE
SHOULD HAVE THE RIGHT TO
DEFEND OURSELVES ALSO."
I THINK MALCOLM WOULD WANT
YOU TO HAVE THIS.
ONLY I THINK FIVE PEOPLE
OR MAYBE SIX HAVE IT.
HMM! THIS IS AMAZING.
HE SAYS, "THE LATE
DR. W.E.B DUBOIS HAD THE
FULL BACKING OF THE
NKRUMAH GOVERNMENT IN
LAYING THE FOUNDATION FOR
THE MONUMENTAL
ENCYCLOPEDIA AFRICANA."
THAT'S VERY INTERESTING.
DID YOU MEET MALCOLM?
DID I MEET MALCOLM? I MET
MALCOLM ONCE.
WHERE WAS THAT?
IT WAS AT BRANDEIS.
OH, WHEN HE WENT -- WHEN
HE WENT TO SPEAK.
YOU WERE THERE. - YEAH.
DID YOU GO UP THERE THEN
AND TALK?
OH YES I DID!
[LAUGHTER] AH, AND IT WAS
AN ESPECIALLY IMPORTANT
MOMENT FOR ME BECAUSE AT
THAT TIME THERE WERE VERY
FEW BLACK PEOPLE AT
BRANDEIS.
AT BRANDEIS.
MAYBE ABOUT FIVE OR SIX.
DID HE MENTION ANYTHING
ABOUT "I DIDN'T SEE MANY BLACKS.
I'M GLAD YOU'RE HERE."
YEAH, WELL. YEAH, HE DID.
- YEAH.
HE DID ACKNOWLEDGE ME AS A
-- WHICH MADE ME FEEL VERY
SPECIAL, WHICH WAS VERY
IMPORTANT AT THAT TIME
GIVEN THE FACT THAT --
THERE WEREN'T A GREAT DEAL
OF POLITICAL MOVEMENTS ON
THE CAMPUS AT THAT TIME
AND I FELT VERY MUCH
ALONE.
SO MALCOLM'S VISIT MARKED
A REALLY IMPORTANT MOMENT
IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF MY
OWN POLITICAL CONSCIOUSNESS.
[ASIAN STRINGS AND DRUM
MUSIC PLAYING]
[♪...]
WHY DON'T WE TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH
MALCOLM, BECAUSE I'VE
NEVER HEARD YOU TALK ABOUT IT.
OH.
ALTHOUGH, I'VE HEARD A LOT
ABOUT THE WORK THAT YOU
DID WITH MALCOLM.
MAYBE I'D LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT THE TIME THAT HE
CAME OVER TO MEET THE
HIROSHIMA NAGASAKI WORLD
PEACE STUDY MISSION
MEMBERS, THEY WERE ALL
HIBAKUSHAS OR ATOM BOMB
VICTIMS AND THREE OF THEM
WERE WRITERS.
AND THEY SAID THEY WANTED
TO MEET MALCOLM MORE THAN
ANY OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
U.S., AND SO, WE MADE THE
EFFORT TO TRY TO GET HIM
OVER FOR A RECEPTION.
WE DIDN'T KNOW TILL THE
VERY LAST MINUTE WHEN THE
RECEPTION HAD ALREADY
BEGUN, THE RAP ON THE DOOR
AND THERE HE WAS.
AND WE REALLY THANK HIM
BECAUSE IT WAS A VERY
DANGEROUS PERIOD.
IT WAS JUST A FEW MONTHS
AFTER HE BOLTED FROM THE NATION.
AND THERE WERE SO MANY
RUMORS THAT HE MIGHT BE
KILLED, AND WE DIDN'T KNOW
WHO MIGHT BE THE ONES TO
DO IT, WHETHER IT WOULD BE
THE POLICE AND FBI OR, YOU
KNOW, PEOPLE FROM THE
NATION OF ISLAM OR WHO.
BUT HE DID COME BECAUSE HE
SAID HE WANTED TO MEET THE
HIBAKUSHAS AND IT WAS AT
OUR APARTMENT IN HARLEM.
YOU KNOW TO THINK THAT HE
WOULD COME AND MEET THESE
PEOPLE, I THOUGHT IT WAS
REALLY WONDERFUL.
AND SO WHAT WAS IT LIKE?
OH, IT'S TOO BAD WE DIDN'T
EVEN THINK OF TAPING HIM
AND THERE WAS ONLY ONE
PROFESSIONAL PHOTOGRAPHER
AND IT TOOK 30 YEARS TO
LOCATE THE GUY, HIS NAME
WAS ED DRUCK.
AND WE FINALLY GOT
PHOTOGRAPHS OF, YOU KNOW,
PICTURES HE TOOK OF
MALCOLM IN AN APARTMENT
WITH JAPANESE PEOPLE
SITTING NEXT TO HIM.
OF COURSE, AT THIS AFFAIR
THERE WERE HARDLY ANY
ASIANS, BECAUSE THE ASIAN
MOVEMENT HADN'T BEGUN YET.
IT WAS MOSTLY BLACK AND
WHITES, IT'S LIKE 50% EACH.
AND I THINK MOST OF PEOPLE
WHO CAME WERE JUST CURIOUS
TO KNOW WHAT MALCOLM WAS
LIKE.
I MEAN, WAS HE SUCH A
HATER?
AND YOU KNOW HE WAS
DEMONIZED SO MUCH BY THE PRESS.
AND THEY WERE REALLY
SURPRISED TO FIND HOW
GRACIOUS HE WAS.
HE SHOOK HANDS WITH -- THE
PLACE WAS PACKED, BUT
THOSE OF NEAR ENOUGH WHO
COULD SHAKE HANDS WITH
HIM, THEY NOTICED THAT HE
WAS AS WARM TO WHITES AS
HE WAS TO BLACKS.
HE WAS JUST WONDERFUL TO
EVERYBODY WHO WAS THERE.
AND WHAT DID YOU THINK?
OH, I MEAN [LAUGHS] WE
WERE IN OUR GLORY TO SAY,
"WOW, MALCOLM X IS RIGHT
IN OUR APARTMENT!"
SO HOW DID YOUR RELATIONSHIP
WITH MALCOLM EVOLVE AFTER THAT?
WELL IT BEGAN THEN.
I HAD BEEN WRITING TO HIM
FOR -- FROM THE TIME I MET
HIM ON OCTOBER 16TH OF
'63.
IT WAS SO TREMENDOUS
MEETING HIM, THAT FROM
THAT MOMENT I HAD BEEN
WRITING TO HIM.
I NEVER HEARD FROM HIM BUT
I KEPT WRITING TO HIM.
AND THEN WHEN HE DID COME
OVER, HE SAID,
"I HAVE BEEN RECEIVING YOUR
LETTERS" AND HE SAID,
"IF I EVER TRAVEL AGAIN, I
WILL WRITE TO YOU."
AND HE CERTAINLY KEPT HIS
PROMISE, I HAVE 11 POST
CARDS FROM NINE COUNTRIES,
WHICH I CHERISH OF COURSE.
WELL, FIRST HE THANKED THE
HIBAKUSHAS FOR COMING TO
HARLEM AND THEN THE TWO
THINGS HE TALKED ABOUT,
HE SPOKE HIGHLY OF MAO AND HE
FELT THAT MAO DID THE
RIGHT THING IN -- WELL HE
SHOWED SORT OF FAVORITISM
TO THE PEASANTS, BUT
BECAUSE THEY WERE FEEDING
THAT HUGE COUNTRY.
AND ALSO AT THAT TIME MAO
WAS FIGHTING AGAINST WELL,
FEUDALISM.
[STRING MUSIC & CHOIR HUMS
IN HARMONY]
AFTER I SAW THE FILM BY
SPIKE LEE, I STARTED TO
IMAGINE WHAT THE FILM
MIGHT HAVE BEEN LIKE IF HE
HAD INCLUDED MUCH MORE
ABOUT MALCOLM'S CROSSING
BORDERS. - UMM HMM.
AND I WAS THINKING, FOR
EXAMPLE, IF -- SINCE HE
USED THE DOCUMENTARY
FOOTAGE, IF THE PHOTOGRAPH
OF HIS ASSASSINATION WITH
YOU, YOU KNOW STANDING,
LEANING OVER HIM, IF THAT
HAD BEEN IN THE FILM, IT
WOULD HAVE GIVEN PEOPLE A
VERY DIFFERENT IDEA OF WHO
-- NOT OF WHOM MALCOLM
WAS, BUT OF THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF MALCOLM.
OH YEAH, BECAUSE HE WAS
SUCH AN INTERNATIONAL PERSON!
DID MALCOLM TALK
SPECIFICALLY ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF CREATING
CROSS RACIAL -- OH YEAH.
-- OR CROSS CULTURAL TIES
AND ALLIANCES?
YEAH, BECAUSE ONE OF THE
LAST THINGS HE SAID WAS,
WELL THIS IS 1964 IN JUNE
AND THE ANTI-WAR MOVEMENT
HADN'T REALLY GOTTEN OFF
THE GROUND, BUT HE SAID, IF U.S.
DOES SEND TROOPS TO
SOUTHEAST ASIA, HE SAID
PROGRESSIVE PEOPLE SHOULD
PROTEST.
AND IT'S TOO BAD HE DIDN'T
LIVE LONG ENOUGH TO SEE
THAT HAPPEN.
[SOFTLY] THAT'S RIGHT.
BUT HE DID SAY THAT "THE
STRUGGLE OF VIETNAM IS THE
STRUGGLE OF THE THIRD
WORLD," MEANING THE
STRUGGLE AGAINST
IMPERIALISM AND
COLONIALISM AND
NEOCOLONIALISM.
SO I MEAN HE WAS -- SO
THIS WAS THE PERIOD WHEN
HE WAS THINKING VERY
CRITICALLY ABOUT THE
NATIONALIST PHILOSOPHY HE
HAD ESPOUSED, HE WAS SORT
OF -- YES.
-- REVISING HIS WHOLE
POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY.
RIGHT, YOU KNOW HE CHANGED
-- YOU KNOW FROM BLACK
NATIONALISM -- YES.
-- TO PAN-AFRICANISM, TO
REVOLUTIONARY
[BOTH AT THE SAME TIME]
INTERNATIONALISM.
YEAH.
WELL DO YOU THINK PEOPLE
TODAY ARE AWARE OF
MALCOLM'S RELATIONSHIP TO
ASIAN INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
AS WELL AS -- NO, I DON'T
THINK SO.
AND EVEN THAT OF HIM
MEETING WITH THE
HIBAKUSHAS IS VERY LITTLE
KNOWN.
IS IT IN THE
AUTOBIOGRAPHY?
WHAT?
IS IT IN -- NO IT'S NOT.
IT'S NOT IN THE
AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
BUT YOU KNOW, THERE'S SO
MANY THINGS NOT IN HIS
AUTOBIOGRAPHY!
[EXHALES] AND THEN, YOU
KNOW, THERE WERE THREE
CHAPTERS THAT ARE MISSING.
AND ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT CHAPTERS THEY
SAID WAS THE ONE ON
AFRICA, YOU KNOW WHEN HE
WENT TO ALL THOSE
PROGRESSIVE AFRICAN COUNTRIES.
ALSO THE CHAPTER ON SISTER
ELLA, I DON'T KNOW WHY
THAT'S MISSING.
AND THERE WAS A THIRD
CHAPTER, AND I DON'T KNOW
IF ANYONE KNOWS WHO HAS
ALL THAT MANUSCRIPT.
SO PEOPLE DON'T KNOW WHAT
HAPPENED, I DON'T THINK.
[SOFTLY] CAN YOU TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE DAY
HE WAS ASSASSINATED?
OH, THAT WAS FEBRUARY 21ST
1965.
I THINK THAT DAY WHEN WE
ALL WENT INTO THE AUDUBON,
I MEAN PEOPLE HAD A
STRANGE FEELING THAT
SOMETHING MIGHT HAPPEN,
WELL BECAUSE THERE WAS A
LOT OF RUMORS LEADING UP
TO IT, BECAUSE NO ONE --
YOU KNOW THAT WEEK NO ONE
REALLY KNEW WHERE HE WAS
STAYING.
HE WANTED TO PROTECT HIS
OWN FAMILY, SO HE DIDN'T
LET -- I DON'T EVEN KNOW
EVEN IF HIS OWN FAMILY KNEW.
THE FACT THAT NOT ONE OF
THE PEOPLE THAT WAS
INVITED TO SPEAK ON THE
PODIUM WITH HIM, THAT NONE
OF THEM SHOWED UP, I MEAN,
I THINK HIS CADRE THOUGHT,
"THAT'S STRANGE, ARE THEY
AFRAID TO COME TODAY AND WHY?"
BUT TO DISPEL THAT KIND OF
FEAR, YOU KNOW HE TOLD HIS
GUARDS NOT TO EVEN -- IT'S
TOO BAD, THE PEOPLE WOULD
THINK IT WAS MISTAKE, HE
TOLD THEM NOT TO CHECK
ANYONE FOR, YOU KNOW FOR
HARDWARE IF THEY WANTED TO
CARRY IT IN.
AND YOU KNOW, PEOPLE
WALKED IN LIKE ANY OTHER
OF HIS MEETINGS.
AND UNFORTUNATELY, I GUESS
SOME GUYS DID COME IN AND
THEN -- [SOFTLY] AND THAT
WAS THE DAY THAT IT
HAPPENED, HIS
ASSASSINATION.
UMM HMM.
YEAH IT WAS -- SO WHAT DID
YOU DO?
WELL, PEOPLE WERE JUST
SHOCKED, I MEAN, THE WHOLE
PLACE WAS IN AN UPROAR.
BUT THOSE WHO DID IT, I
MEAN CERTAINLY HAD IT WELL
PLANNED OUT TO GET THE
ATTENTION OF EVERYONE IN
THE AUDITORIUM TO LOOK AT
THEM, YOU KNOW, WHEN THEY
DID THE DISTRACTION.
YOU KNOW, WHERE TWO GUYS
JUMPED UP AND ONE OF THEM
SAID, "GET YOUR HANDS OUT
OF MY POCKET." - RIGHT.
ALL OF US WERE LOOKING AT
THEM WHEN -- THEN ALL OF A
SUDDEN, WE HEARD THE
SHOOTING AND THERE WERE
PEOPLE UP FRONT, GUYS WHO
WERE SHOOTING MALCOLM.
IT WAS JUST A SHOCK AND
THEN OF COURSE I MEAN, ALL
THE CHAIRS CAME CRASHING
DOWN AND I DON'T KNOW
THERE WAS SCREAMING AND
YELLING AND RUNNING AND IT
WAS JUST UTTER CHAOS.
UMM HMM.
PEOPLE WERE JUST, I DON'T
KNOW, I MEAN THE SHOCK
THAT THIS COULD HAPPEN TO
MALCOLM OF ALL PEOPLE AND
THIS CERTAINLY WAS I THINK
ONE OF THE GREATEST BLOWS
TO THE BLACK LIBERATION
MOVEMENT.
UMM HMM.
BUT THEN IT DIDN'T STOP
PEOPLE I THINK AFTER THAT,
THE MOVEMENT MUSHROOMED
INTO A MUCH MORE RADICAL
STRUGGLE.
[MIDDLE EASTERN KLEZMER
MUSIC PLAYING]
[♪...]
JAMES FORMAN GAVE THIS AMAZING
SPEECH ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF INCLUDING A
CLASS ANALYSIS IN ONE'S
ANALYSIS OF RACE OR
RACISM. - YEAH.
SO THAT WAS LIKE I THINK
ONE OF THE MOMENTS AT
WHICH I BECAME PERSUADED
THAT IT WAS POSSIBLE TO
MAKE THOSE CONNECTIONS,
WHICH MANY PEOPLE DID NOT
-- RIGHT. YES.
-- WANT TO MAKE IN THOSE
DAYS.
OF COURSE, NOW EVERY ONE
TALKS ABOUT RACE, CLASS,
GENDER, SEXUALITY. - YES, I
KNOW!
[LAUGHTER] IT'S LIKE A
MANTRA. - YEAH!
BUT IN THOSE DAYS WE WERE
GROPING OUR WAY TOWARD AN
UNDERSTANDING OF HOW IT
MIGHT BE POSSIBLE TO BRING
THOSE TOGETHER.
THERE WAS A LOT OF MALE
SUPREMACY IN THE BLACK
MOVEMENT AND I REMEMBER
JAMES FORMAN ALWAYS TALKED
ABOUT HOW IMPORTANT WOMEN
WERE - OH! I DIDN'T KNOW THAT.
-- TO THE STRUGGLE. - UH-HUH.
FANNIE LOU HAMER: "I AM
SICK OF THE RACIST WAR IN
VIETNAM WHEN WE DON'T HAVE
JUSTICE IN THE UNITED STATES!"
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] HE
TALKED ABOUT RUBY DORIS
SMITH-ROBINSON. - OH YEAH!
SHE'S NEVER RECEIVED THE
CREDIT SHE DESERVES -
YEAH. RIGHT.
-- FOR THE ORGANIZING SHE
DID IN THE SOUTH. - YES!
YEAH, BECAUSE PEOPLE KNOW
ALMOST WHO ALL THOSE BIG
NAMES WERE, BUT NOT THE WOMEN
[BOTH AT THE SAME TIME] WHO DID
THE WORK.
WHO DID THE REAL WORK.
- UMM HMM.
AND IT SEEMS TO ME THAT IF
WE WANT TO ENCOURAGE YOUNG
PEOPLE TO CONTINUE TO DO
THE ORGANIZING WORK THAT
WILL LEAD TO SOCIAL
MOVEMENTS THAT WILL
HOPEFULLY HAVE A RADICAL
IMPACT. - RIGHT.
WE HAVE TO LEGITIMIZE THE
ROLE OF THE ORGANIZER.
OH, YEAH!
WHICH SEEMS ALSO
LEGITIMIZING WORK THAT,
THAT WOMEN -- YEAH WOMEN
HAVE DONE.
AND LIKE THE WORK THAT
YOU'VE DONE.
[EXHALES] WELL - [LAUGHS]
I MEAN WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT THAT.
I KNOW BUT - WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT HOW
IMPORTANT THAT WORK IS AND
WITHOUT THE INITIATIVE
THAT YOU TOOK, WE COULDN'T
TALK ABOUT MALCOLM'S
IMPORTANT RELATIONSHIP
WITH ASIANS
AND ASIAN - AMERICANS.
[WIND BLOWING] [MOURNFUL
NATIVE-AMERICAN CHANTING]
THE WAY HISTORY IS
REMEMBERED. - UMM HMM.
AND YOU KNOW, WHAT IS
SUBJUGATED IN OUR MEMORY
AND YOU KNOW PRESENTED TO
YOUNG PEOPLE TODAY, THAT
WHOLE HISTORY OF WOMEN OF
COLOR WORKING TOGETHER
AROUND INTERNATIONAL
POLITICAL PROJECTS IS VERY
MUCH MARGINALIZED.
NOT VERY MANY WOMEN WHO
WORK WITHIN WOMEN OF COLOR
FORMATIONS TODAY ARE AWARE
OF THE THIRD WORLD WOMEN'S
ALLIANCE. - YEAH!
AND THAT SORT OF REALLY
POWERFUL EMERGENCE OF
FEMINIST ENERGY THAT
INSISTED ON -- UMM HMM.
-- ISSUES OF CLASS AND
RACE AND THEN EVENTUALLY
SEXUALITY.
RIGHT, BUT YOU KNOW MANY
OF THOSE PEOPLE WHO WERE
IN THE THIRD WORLD WOMEN'S
ALLIANCE I THINK WERE
ALSO THOSE WHO ARE AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE FORMATION
OF THE VENCEREMOS BRIGADE.
I THINK THE WAY YOU TELL
THE HISTORY, IT'S VERY
CLEAR THAT ALL OF THOSE
STRUGGLES AND ALL OF THOSE
ISSUES ALWAYS INTERSECT.
YES, AND PEOPLE CROSS OVER
AND SUPPORT OTHER PEOPLE'S
ISSUES.
I THINK THAT WHAT HAS
ALWAYS HAPPENED.
AND REMEMBERING THAT DENISE
OLIVER, FOR EXAMPLE -- YES, YES!
-- YOU KNOW, WHO WAS ONE
OF THE LEADERS OF THE
YOUNG LORDS - YES, RIGHT!
AND SHE WAS NOT PUERTO
RICAN.
SHE WAS BLACK. SHE WAS BLACK
RIGHT? - RIGHT!
AND THERE WERE PUERTO
RICANS LIKE THE TORRES
BROTHERS AND ALL, AND
CHANGO MONGES, THEY WERE
MORE WITH THE BLACK GROUP.
THAT'S RIGHT, THE BLACK
LIBERATION ARMY.
AND THEN THERE WAS
ELIZABETH MARTÍNEZ YOU
KNOW, WHO WAS ONE OF THE
MAIN ORGANIZERS IN SNCC
AND SHE WAS ABLE -- YEAH,
THERE WERE PEOPLE
WHO CROSSED THE LINE.
ABSOLUTELY, THERE WERE EVEN
ASIANS IN THE
BLACK PANTHER PARTY.
- THAT'S RIGHT.
LIKE RICHARD AOKI AND I
DON'T KNOW OAKLAND OR WHATEVER.
YEAH RICHARD AOKI. I KNEW HIM.
OH. UH-HUH.
BACK IN THOSE DAYS.
YEAH, HISTORICAL THINGS
THAT PEOPLE DON'T
UNDERSTAND THAT, WHEN
BLACKS HAPPENED TO BE SENT
ALONG WITH AMERICANS
SOLDIERS AT THE TURN OF
THE CENTURY TO THE
PHILIPPINES, THAT LOT OF
THOSE BLACK SOLDIERS WERE
APPALLED AT THE BRUTALITY
OF WHITE AMERICAN
SOLDIERS, THAT THEY WENT
INTO THE MOUNTAINS, WHEN
THEY WERE IN THE
PHILIPPINES AND THEY
HOOKED UP WITH THE
PHILIPPINE GUERRILLAS.
AND YOU COULD GET PROOF OF
A LOT OF IT BY THE FACT
THAT SO MANY BLACK NEWS
WRITERS HAD WRITTEN ABOUT
- THOSE THINGS, YET YOU DON'T
HEAR ABOUT IT THAT MUCH. - TRUE.
BUT EVEN WAY BACK WHEN
THAT GROUP CALLED SAINT
PATRICK'S BRIGADE THAT WAS
SENT OUT TO GO AFTER THE
MEXICANS AND THEY WERE
WITH THE AMERICAN ARMY,
BUT WHEN THEY REALIZED
THAT THOSE POOR MEXICANS
WERE LIKE THE IRISH
PEASANTS WHO WERE FIGHTING
FOR THEIR FREEDOM, YOU
KNOW, FROM THE BRITISH.
WELL THOSE IRISH PEOPLE
WENT ON THE OTHER SIDE AND
- JOINED THE MEXICANS. - RIGHT.
I THINK THINGS LIKE THAT
HAVE HAPPENED.
YEAH, AND BACK IN THE 19TH
CENTURY, THE NATIONAL
COLORED LABOR UNION WHICH
WAS FORMED BECAUSE BLACK
PEOPLE WEREN'T ALLOWED TO
JOIN THE NATIONAL LABOR
UNION -- YEAH. UH HMM.
-- THAT WAS REALLY THE
ONLY MAJOR LABOR ORGANIZATION
THAT SPOKE OUT AGAINST THE ASIAN
EXCLUSION LAWS.
OH, YEAH AND SO DID
FREDERICK DOUGLAS.
THERE'S BEEN THIS KIND OF
CROSSOVERS ALL OVER, WHERE
A LOT OF PEOPLE WONDERED,
WHEN PEOPLE SAY HAVE
ASIANS EVER DONE ANYTHING
FOR AFRICANS?
WELL, CHINA IN 1965 WHEN
MAO WAS IN POWER, SENT
THOUSANDS OF WORKERS TO
HELP BUILD THE TANZAM RAILWAY.
THAT'S RIGHT. ABSOLUTELY.
YEAH, AND THEN WHEN YOU
THINK ON THE OTHER HAND
HERE WAS A PERSON LIKE HO
CHI MINH WHO SUPPORTED THE
GARVEY MOVEMENT IN HARLEM
AND WHO ALSO LIVED IN THE
BLACK COMMUNITY IN
CHICAGO.
THEN WHEN YOU THINK EVEN
BEFORE THAT IN THE EARLY
'20'S, PEOPLE LIKE SEN
KATAYAMA, THE JAPANESE
LABOR LEADER AND CLAUDE
MCKAY BEGAN THE COMMUNIST
PARTY OF NEW YORK AND IT'S
TOO BAD THAT SO MANY
PEOPLE DON'T KNOW THESE
THINGS.
- DON'T KNOW THAT HISTORY.
THAT'S RIGHT.
YOU KNOW NAME WAS ANGELA
DAVIS RIGHT, I MEAN IT STILL IS.
BUT I WAS THAT ANGELA
DAVIS EVERYBODY WAS
ORGANIZING AROUND AND
TALKING ABOUT.
AND WHEN I GOT OUT OF
JAIL, WELL FIRST OF ALL IT
WAS REALLY SCARY AND THAT
WAS ALMOST AS SCARY AS
FACING THE DEATH PENALTY.
THE IDEA THAT ALL OF THESE
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE ALL
OVER THE WORLD HAD THIS
IDEA ABOUT THIS PERSON
WHOSE NAME WAS ANGELA
DAVIS.
AND YOU KNOW I KEPT
THINKING, YOU KNOW
EVERYBODY IS GOING TO BE
SO DISAPPOINTED!
[AUDIENCE LAUGHTER] THEY
HAD THIS IDEA THAT I WAS A
DIFFERENT KIND OF
REVOLUTIONARY.
THAT THE WAY I TALKED
WOULD BE DIFFERENT.
BECAUSE THERE WERE, YOU
KNOW, CERTAIN NOTIONS OF
WHAT A REVOLUTIONARY WAS
LIKE.
AND YOU KNOW I TRIED IT,
BUT...[LAUGHS]
[AUDIENCE LAUGHTER] YEARS LATER,
I MEET PEOPLE
AND THEY -- YOU KNOW
THEY TELL ME THE STORIES.
THEY HAVE STORIES THROUGH
THE CAMPAIGN AROUND MY
CASE THAT LINK THEM TO
THEIR PAST AND I THINK
THIS IS SO IMPORTANT
PARTICULARLY SINCE THIS
STORY IS NOT RECORDED IN
THE PLACES WHERE PEOPLE
LEARN THE HISTORY OF THIS
COUNTRY.
[RAP MUSIC PLAYING]
I KNOW YOU HAVE A LONG, LONG
HISTORY OF INVOLVEMENT
WITH POLITICAL PRISONERS
FROM GERONIMO PRATT TO
MUMIA TO -- WAIT, BUT
NONE OF US HAVE HEARD --
[EXCITED] YOU KNOW, WE ALL
KNOW THAT YOU AND GEORGE
JACKSON WERE VERY CLOSE.
WELL, HOW DID YOU MEET?
I WAS FIRED FROM MY
POSITION IN THE PHILOSOPHY
DEPARTMENT AT UCLA.
[FUNKY, 1970'S MUSIC
PLAYING] I'M REPRESENTING
THE CHE-LUMUMBA CLUB OF
THE COMMUNIST PARTY.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS]
THERE WAS A STATUTE ON THE
BOOKS, IN THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA THAT HAD
IT'S ORIGINS IN THE
MCCARTHY ERA THAT
PROHIBITED THE UNIVERSITY
FROM HIRING ANYONE
-- OH, REALLY?
-- WHO WAS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMUNIST PARTY.
SO THAT'S WHERE THAT -- I
HAD NO IDEA THAT THERE WAS
SUCH A STATUTE, 'CAUSE I
WAS IDENTIFIED BY THE
REGENTS AND THE GOVERNOR
AS THIS "DANGEROUS COMMUNIST."
AND AS IT TURNED OUT MANY
PEOPLE WHO WERE IN PRISON,
OF COURSE READ THE
ARTICLES IN THE NEWSPAPER
AND I BEGAN TO GET LETTERS
FROM PEOPLE IN PRISON.
AND [EXHALES] I DIDN'T
REALIZE THAT GEORGE HAD
WRITTEN ME UNTIL AFTER HE
AND FLEETA DRUMGO AND JOHN
CLUTCHETTE WERE -- CLUTCHETTE
YEAH.
-- WERE CHARGED WITH THE
KILLING OF A GUARD AT
SOLEDAD PRISON IN JANUARY
OF 1970 AND OF COURSE THEY
BECAME COLLECTIVELY KNOWN
AS THE SOLEDAD BROTHERS.
I RECEIVE DEATH THREATS
EVERYDAY, SCORES AND
SCORES OF THEM, HUNDREDS,
THOUSANDS OF DEATH THREATS.
- WHAT? BECAUSE YOU WERE A
COMMUNIST?
BECAUSE I WAS A COMMUNIST,
BECAUSE I WAS BLACK, YOU KNOW
[LAUGHS].
SO I GOT -- YOU KNOW
PEOPLE WOULD SAY, "YOU'RE
GONNA BE DEAD BY SUNDOWN."
- OH GOD!
YOU KNOW, "GO BACK TO
RUSSIA, GO BACK TO AFRICA."
YOU KNOW ALL KINDS OF
REALLY...NASTY THINGS.
AND SO I HAD TO HAVE
SECURITY WITH ME ALL THE
TIME, ARMED SECURITY.
AND JONATHAN WHO WAS ABOUT
17 AT THE TIME HE BECAME A
PART THAT SECURITY FORCE.
I TRAVELED UP AND DOWN THE
STATES SPEAKING OUT ON
BEHALF OF GEORGE.
GEORGE THEN LEARNED ABOUT
THE WORK THAT I WAS DOING
AND WE BEGIN TO
CORRESPOND.
I ACTUALLY ONLY MET WITH
HIM INDIVIDUALLY, I THINK TWICE.
I FELT THAT SINCE I WAS
FIGHTING FOR MY RIGHT TO
TEACH AND SINCE THE
ARGUMENT I WAS MAKING WAS
THAT THE REGENTS WANTED TO
FIRE ME BECAUSE OF
MY RADICAL POLITICS
-- YEAH! UH-HUH.
-- NOT BECAUSE I WASN'T
ABLE TO CARRY OUT THE JOB
FOR WHICH I WAS HIRED.
I FELT THAT THERE WAS A
SIMILAR SITUATION WITH THE
SOLEDAD BROTHERS -- THAT
THEY WERE BEING CHARGED
WITH MURDER BECAUSE OF
THEIR POLITICS AND NOT
BECAUSE THEY WERE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ACTUAL
INCIDENT WHICH INVOLVED
THE KILLING OF
A GUARD AT SOLEDAD. - OH.
AND JONATHAN WAS KILLED --
OH YEAH, HE WAS KILLED A
YEAR BEFORE GEORGE, HUH?
HE WAS KILLED A YEAR
BEFORE GEORGE, AND I WAS
ARRESTED IN OCTOBER OF
1970.
- OH.
A COUPLE OF MONTHS AFTER
JONATHAN WAS KILLED.
I WAS INVOLVED IN HELPING
TO DEVELOP THE CASE FOR
THE SOLEDAD BROTHERS EVEN
AFTER I HAD
BEEN ARRESTED MYSELF.
- GEE.
AND AT THE SAME TIME WE
THOUGHT ABOUT HOW TO BUILD
A MOVEMENT TO FREE ALL
POLITICAL PRISONERS.
AND EVEN A VERY DEEP
EMOTIONAL RELATIONSHIP
SUCH AS THE ONE I HAD WITH
GEORGE REVOLVED AROUND OUR
ATTEMPTS TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT WAS GOING ON IN THE
WORLD AND HOW WE COULD
ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO BECOME
REVOLUTIONARIES.
- UH-HUH.
YOU KNOW, WHAT IS THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
POLITICAL PRISONERS AND
THE HUGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
WHO WENT INTO PRISON
BECAUSE OF -- BECAUSE THEY
WERE TARGETS OF RACISM?
AND THAT WAS THE MARK OF
AN ERA.
[JAZZ MUSIC PLAYING] [MALE
VOICE NARRATES] "THE FBI HAS
ISSUED A WARRANT FOR THE ARREST
OF ANGELA
YVONNE DAVIS, BLACK
COMMUNIST MILITANT.
SHE HAS ALLEGEDLY
PURCHASED SEVERAL GUNS IN
THE PAST AND IS POSSIBLY
ARMED AND DANGEROUS."
IF I HAD BEEN ARRESTED IN
NORTH CAROLINA -- YEAH!
[LAUGHTER] OH! UH-HUH.
-- OR SOME PLACE LIKE
THAT, IT WOULD HAVE BEEN A
VERY DIFFERENT SITUATION
BECAUSE THE VERY NIGHT I
WAS ARRESTED, PEOPLE
GATHERED OUTSIDE OF THE
JAIL AND AS I WAS BEING
ARRESTED AND GOING THROUGH
THE WHOLE PROCESS OF BEING
FINGERPRINTED AND BEING
PUT INTO A SORT OF
SOLITARY CELL, I COULD
HEAR ALL THE PEOPLE
-- OUTSIDE?
-- LARGE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE
CHANTING.
SO...
COULD YOU TALK ABOUT THOSE
TWO MONTHS?
OR DO YOU WANT TO STILL
KEEP IT QUIET WHERE YOU
WERE OR WHO...
WELL, I WAS WITH A MAN
NAME DAVID POINDEXTER, WHO
WAS ALSO ARRESTED.
- YES.
ON CHARGES OF, FEDERAL
CHARGES OF HARBORING A
FUGITIVE.
UMM HMM.
HE WON THE CASE.
I SAW POLICE, QUITE A FEW
POLICEMEN, THEY DIDN'T
RECOGNIZE ME.
I DON'T THINK ANYONE COULD
HAVE RECOGNIZED ME, I WAS
PRETTY WELL MADE UP,
ESPECIALLY SINCE PEOPLE
ASSOCIATED ME WITH, YOU
KNOW, THE BIG AFRO.
AND NO ONE RECOGNIZED YOU?
WELL, I HAD ON A WIG.
I HAD ON MORE MAKE UP THAT
I'VE EVER HAD ON IN MY LIFE.
I HAD FALSE EYELASHES.
DID YOU HAVE SAFE HOUSES
OR YOU JUST PLAYED IT WISE?
- IT WAS ALL IMPROVISED.
- AH! MUST HAVE BEEN SCARY.
AND THEN, WAIT, WHERE DID
THEY MOVE YOU AFTER THAT?
THEY EXTRADITED ME TO
CALIFORNIA AND I WAS TAKEN
TO THE MARIN COUNTY JAIL.
- UMM HMM.
WHERE I STAYED FOR ABOUT A
YEAR.
BECAUSE I NEVER HAD THE
OPPORTUNITY TO GO OUTSIDE
AND I WAS PALE, MY EYES
GOT WORSE BECAUSE I NEVER
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
USE THEM.
OH.
YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU'RE JUST
IN A CELL AND YOU GOT TO
LOOK SAY SIX FEET ACROSS
THE ROOM AND THEN SUDDENLY
YOU GO INTO A LARGER SPACE
IT'S DIFFICULT TO SEE.
[APPLAUSE] I'D LIKE TO
SORT OF TAKE NOTE OF THE
FACT THAT THE THREE OF US
ARE SITTING HERE AND
THAT'S QUITE AMAZING
BECAUSE WE HAVE --
[APPLAUSE] AND I'M
THINKING ABOUT THE
PERSONAL AND POLITICAL
RELATIONSHIPS THAT GO BACK
WITH CHARLENE SINCE 1967.
I MEAN IT WAS BECAUSE OF
CHARLENE MITCHELL THAT I
JOINED THE COMMUNIST
PARTY.
[LAUGHTER] YOU KNOW
CHARLENE AND HER BROTHER
FRANKLIN WHO IS NO LONGER
WITH US, AND KENDRA
ALEXANDER HIS WIFE, WHO
PLAYED -- BOTH OF WHOM
PLAYED AN ENORMOUS ROLE IN
BUILDING THIS CAMPAIGN.
AND I HAVE KNOWN MARGARET
SINCE, BEFORE I WAS BORN.
[LAUGHTER] LITERALLY.
WE WERE BORN ACROSS THE
STREET FROM EACH OTHER IN
BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA.
AND OUR MOTHERS WERE BEST
FRIENDS AND STILL ARE BEST
FRIENDS.
AND WHEN I WAS ARRESTED
AND GOT TAKEN TO THE FBI
BUILDING, I DIDN'T KNOW
WHERE THEY WERE TAKING ME
OR WHAT WAS GOING ON, THEY
WOULDN'T LET ME MAKE A
PHONE CALL.
I MEAN FOR A WHILE I
THOUGHT THAT THEY ARE
GOING TO KILL ME, BECAUSE
I HADN'T -- I HAD NO
CONTACT WITH ANYONE, THESE
-- I REFUSED TO SPEAK TO
THE FBI, YOU KNOW BECAUSE
I LEARNED AS A CHILD THAT
YOU DON'T TALK TO THE FBI.
AND FINALLY THEY TOLD ME
THAT THERE WAS SOMEONE WHO
SAID SHE WAS MY ATTORNEY,
BUT SHE LOOKED LIKE SHE
WAS ABOUT 16 YEARS OLD.
[LAUGHTER] AND THEY DIDN'T
BELIEVE THAT SHE WAS AN ATTORNEY.
[LAUGHTER] SO MARGARET WAS
THE FIRST ATTORNEY AND OF
COURSE, YOU KNOW THE FACT
THAT SHE WAS THERE MEANT
EVERYTHING IN THE WORLD TO
ME.
AND SHE STAYED WITH THE
CASE UNTIL THE ACQUITTAL
THAT WAS 18 MONTHS LATER,
I THINK.
- UMM HMM.
AND SHE BROUGHT HER FAMILY
OUT TO CALIFORNIA.
I MEAN SHE MOVED, AND WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR HELPING TO
PUT TOGETHER THE ENTIRE
TEAM.
new person: UNTIL THAT JURY SAID
NOT GUILTY, WE THOUGHT WE
WOULD LOSE THIS WOMAN, WE
REALLY DID.
BUT WHAT STRIKES ME AS
NEARLY MIRACULOUS, EVERY
TIME I THINK ABOUT THIS
CAMPAIGN AND THIS CASE, IS
THAT ANGELA'S VOICE, THE
VOICE THAT WE'VE JUST
HEARD, THAT WORK, THOSE
BOOKS, THOSE RALLIES SHE'S
ATTENDED, HER CONTINUING
ABILITY TO RECONSTRUCT AND
RETHINK THE PROBLEMS THAT
WE FACE AS A COUNTRY AND
AS A MOVEMENT TO BRING TO
US THE ISSUE OF PRISONS IN
THE WAY IN WHICH -- THE
LEADERSHIP THAT SHE HAS
GIVEN TO THAT ISSUE, THAT
WOULD HAVE BEEN SILENCED,
IF WE HADN'T WON.
FOLLOWING ANGELA'S BEING
PUT ON THE FBI'S MOST
WANTED LIST AND SO ON, OUR
CAMPAIGN TO SECURE HER
RIGHT TO COME BACK INTO AN
ENVIRONMENT THAT WOULD
PERMIT HER TO COME BACK
WITHOUT BEING KILLED,
BECAUSE ONCE YOU'RE ON THE
FBI'S MOST WANTED LIST,
YOU KNOW, THEY HAVE A
RIGHT TO KILL YOU,
TO BRING YOU BACK.
AND THE OTHER WAS TO --
THAT SHE WOULD HAVE A FAIR
HEARING AND THAT WAS
CERTAINLY NOT TO BE HAD.
THIS WAS CLEARLY "THE" BIG
CASE, NOT ONLY AGAINST
ANGELA, BUT FOR THE FBI,
BECAUSE THEY WERE MAKING
MAJOR CLAIMS THAT THEY
WERE GOING TO STOP ALL
THIS QUOTE: "TERRORISM IN
ITS TRACKS."
THE IDEA WAS TO BUILD A
MOVEMENT THAT WAS
COMMUNIST, THAT WAS NOT
COMMUNIST, THAT WAS
POLITICAL, THAT WAS NOT
POLITICAL, THAT WAS
RELIGIOUS, THAT WAS NOT
RELIGIOUS, THAT WAS WOMEN,
THAT WAS AFRICAN-AMERICAN,
LATINO, ASIAN, NATIVE AMERICAN.
AND IN ALL OF THESE
INSTANCES, ALL OF THESE
PEOPLES WERE INCLUDED AND
THAT WAS -- YOU KNOW THIS
WAS A MAJOR EFFORT,
BECAUSE NOT AT ALL TIMES
WAS THERE THE TRUST THAT
ONE COULD ALWAYS GET THAT.
WE KNEW IN ORDER TO WIN
ANGELA'S FREEDOM, WE HAD
TO DO IT.
[BIRDS CHIRPING] OH!
ACTUALLY, LOOK OVER THE
TREES THERE.
- WAIT, WHAT IS...? - THIS IS
ALL PARK LAND.
- UMM HMM.
BUT IT'S NOT -- YOU DON'T
FEEL LIKE [LAUGHS] YOU'RE
CONFINED WITH ALL THOSE
TREES AROUND YOU?
[LAUGHTER] NO, I'M FINE.
I LOVE TREES!
- OH, GOOD!
SO, THESE ARE THE TWO
LITTLE BOOKS THAT I WAS GONNA
-- OH!
OKAY, ONE IS CALLED "ARE
PRISONS OBSOLETE?"
- UH-HUH.
AND THE OTHER ONE IS
CALLED "EVOLUTION DEMOCRACY."
- OH.
SO, I'M GONNA -- OH WAIT,
YOU'RE GONNA GIVE THEM TO ME?
OH ABSOLUTELY, ABSOLUTELY!
OH, THANK YOU! OH.
GEE, I THINK ALL THE
PRISONERS WOULD LOVE TO
READ THIS.
[BAND TESTING MIC AND
TUNING INSTRUMENTS] SOUL PEPPA!
WELFARE...
CRITICAL RESISTANCE!
OAKLAND!
[PERCUSSIVE JAZZ MUSIC
PLAYING] AUDIENCE MEMBER:
"WE LOVE YOU, YURI!"
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] I
THINK YOU SHOULD BE PROUD
THAT ALL OF YOU ARE PEOPLE
WHO SUPPORT POLITICAL PRISONERS.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] IN
FACT, YOU CONDEMN THE U.S.
PRISON-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX,
BECAUSE OF ITS CORRUPTNESS
AND RACISM.
[FUNKY 1970'S MUSIC
PLAYING] REAL SECURITY IS
NOT LOCKING UP MORE AND
MORE PEOPLE.
[APPLAUSE] THAT'S NOT WHAT
REAL SECURITY IS.
REAL SECURITY IS KNOWING
THAT YOU WILL HAVE
SHELTER, THAT YOU WILL
HAVE FOOD, THAT YOU WILL
HAVE BEAUTY IN YOUR LIFE,
THAT YOU WILL HAVE A
FUTURE, THAT YOUR FAMILY
HAS A FUTURE.
THAT'S WHAT SECURITY IS.
[FUNKY 1970'S MUSIC
CONTINUES PLAYING] I MEAN
TO SHUTDOWN A FACILITY AND
GET THAT MONEY
REALLOCATED, IT REQUIRES
NOT JUST LIKE SUING, NOT
EVEN JUST LEGISLATION TO
CLOSE IT DOWN, BUT REALLY
AN INTENSE AMOUNT OF
ORGANIZING.
[ANGELA DAVIS' VOICE] I
CANNOT BELIEVE THAT TEN
YEARS HAVE PASSED SINCE
THE FIRST CRITICAL
RESISTANCE CONFERENCE.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] AND
WE ARE STILL HERE!
AS A RESULT OF TEN YEARS
OF EXTRAORDINARY
ORGANIZING BY CRITICAL
RESISTANCE AND BY OTHER
ORGANIZERS AND ACTIVISTS
ALL OVER THE COUNTRY AND
IN OTHER PARTS OF THE
WORLD.
THE WORK THAT PEOPLE HAVE
DONE OVER THE YEARS AROUND
CASES OF POLITICAL
PRISONERS CAN BE THE BASIS
FOR A LARGER MOVEMENT TO
CHALLENGE -- YES.
-- THE PROLIFERATION OF
PRISONS, WHICH IS
THREATENING TO TAKE OVER
LARGE AREAS OF OUR SOCIETY.
YOU KNOW, FOR EXAMPLE
EDUCATION.
FUNDS THAT SHOULD BE GOING
INTO EDUCATION ARE NOW
GOING INTO THE --
BUILDING OF PRISONS.
YEAH, BOTH BUILDING
PRISONS AND PROVIDING THE
- FUNDS FOR THE HOLDING OF
1.5 MILLION PEOPLE -- YES!
IT'S NOW 1.5 MILLION.
--IN PRISON.
I THINK YOU'RE THE ONE
THAT REALLY STARTED THE --
YOU KNOW, THE MOVEMENT TO
SUPPORT POLITICAL
PRISONERS, DIDN'T YOU?
WELL, FIRST WE WERE
SUPPORTING YOU.
- NO, I DIDN'T KNOW. NO.
- WE WERE SUPPORTING YOU.
- EXACTLY.
- EXACTLY, EXACTLY!
BUT THERE HAD BEEN CASES
BEFORE THAT, YOU REMEMBER
- THERE WAS A CASE OF HUEY
NEWTON? - OH, YEAH!
AND THE FIRST CASE I GOT
INVOLVED WITH I THINK WAS
- NELSON MANDELA. - REALLY?
YES, AND THE PUERTO RICAN
NATIONALISTS.
WELL THAT'S I THINK ONE OF
THE FIRST PEOPLE THAT I
STARTED WRITING TO WAS
LOLITA.
- AND WE WROTE FOR A LONG
TIME. - UMM!
THEN WHEN SHE WAS FREED, I
COULDN'T BELIEVE I WAS
FINALLY GOING
TO GET TO MEET HER.
YEAH, SHE AND OSCAR
COLLAZO AND RAFAEL MIRANDA
HAD BEEN -- WERE AT THAT
TIME THE LONGEST HELD
POLITICAL PRISONERS IN THE
HISTORY OF THIS COUNTRY.
YOU'RE RIGHT!
[♪...] [ANGELA DAVIS' VOICE]
THE STRUGGLE
AGAINST THE DEATH PENALTY
IS THE FRONT LINE OF THE
STRUGGLE AGAINST THE
PRISON-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX.
AS PRISONS BECOME MORE
NUMEROUS, MORE REPRESSIVE
INCLUDING THE SUPERMAX
PRISONS, AS THEY BECOME
MORE INTERTWINED WITH THE
CORPORATE ECONOMY, THEY
INFLUENCE THE PRACTICES OF
OTHER INSTITUTIONS,
ESPECIALLY SCHOOLS.
EVER YOUNGER PEOPLE ARE
TRIED AS ADULTS, THE
SCHOOLS THAT ARE ATTENDED
BY THESE CHILDREN BECOME
INCREASINGLY LIKE PRISONS,
FOCUSING ON SURVEILLANCE
AND DISCIPLINE AND
SECURITY AND NOT ON EDUCATION.
THEY ARE PREP SCHOOLS FOR
PRISON.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] IT'S
VERY MUCH IN LINE WITH THE
FACT THAT THEY'LL PAY
$30,000 A YEAR TO HOUSE
SOMEONE FOR LIFE
PRACTICALLY, WHO HAS BEEN
CONVICTED UNDER THE
THREE-STRIKES MEASURES,
BUT THEY WON'T TRY TO COME
UP WITH MONEY TO GUARANTEE
THAT SOMEONE WILL GO
THROUGH THE UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM, SO THAT THEY DON'T
END UP IN THESE
ALTERNATIVE ECONOMIES THAT
LEAD THEM YOU KNOW, TO PRISON.
WE HAVE TO DEVELOP A
VOCABULARY AND THE WHOLE
SET OF ARGUMENTS THAT WILL
BEGIN TO BREAK DOWN THE WAY
IN WHICH PEOPLE TEND TO
THINK ABOUT A CRIME IN
RELATIONSHIP TO THEIR OWN
LIVES, IN RELATIONSHIP TO
THEIR OWN FEARS.
I MEAN, WHAT ABOUT THE
ENVIRONMENTAL CRIME?
- UMM HMM. YEAH.
[AUDIENCE MURMURS IN
AGREEMENT] WHAT ABOUT
FORMS OF THE CRIME THAT
HAVE AN IMPACT ON EVERYONE?
WHEN THAT DISASTER HIT NEW
ORLEANS, THE PEOPLE COULD
NOT ESCAPE.
[♪...] [WOMAN'S VOICE NARRATES]
"AMONG THE THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
LEFT TO RISING FLOOD WATERS,
WERE HUNDREDS OF ORLEANS
PARISH PRISONERS.
PRISON GUARDS AND
OFFICIALS SIMPLY WALKED
AWAY FROM FLOODING JAIL
CELLS THAT IMPRISONED
6000 PEOPLE.
[CAMERA SHUTTERS CLICKING]
PRISONERS WERE TRAPPED FOR
AS LONG AS FOUR DAYS IN
SEWAGE TAINTED WATER UP TO
THEIR CHESTS, WITHOUT FOOD
AND WATER."
WHEN THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT SENT FORCES
THEY ONLY PROTECTED THE
- PROPERTY OF THE PEOPLE WHO
OWNED A LOT. - YES EXACTLY.
BUT THE BLACK PEOPLE, EVEN
TODAY DO NOT HAVE ADEQUATE
LIVING CONDITIONS.
I THINK IT CERTAINLY EXPOSED THE
TOTAL LACK OF CARING.
- ABSOLUTELY.
YOU WOULD THINK AMERICA
WOULD BE SO ASHAMED.
[♪...] [CROWD NOISES]
[MOUTHING THE
WORDS, "I LOVE HER!" ]
EVEN THOUGH AS MANY AS
200,000 ASIAN WOMEN AND
YOUNG GIRLS, MOSTLY FROM
KOREA BUT ALSO INCLUDING
PHILIPPINES, CHINA,
INDONESIA AND OTHER
PACIFIC ISLANDS WERE TAKEN
AWAY DECEPTIVELY AND
METHODICALLY BY JAPANESE
SOLDIERS AND SEXUALLY
VIOLATED IN THE MOST
FRIGHTENING AND SYSTEMATIC
MANNER, THESE VICTIMS
INSULTINGLY CALLED THE
"COMFORT WOMEN," WERE NOT
MENTIONED IN THE TOKYO
TRIBUNAL BECAUSE JAPAN AND
THE UNITED STATES
CONSPIRED TO
SHELF THIS ISSUE.
THE KOREAN WOMEN HAVE NOT
FORGOTTEN ABOUT IT AND FOR
THE SAKE OF ALL "COMFORT
WOMEN," BOTH THOSE WHO
DIED AND THOSE SURVIVING,
THEY DEMONSTRATE EVERY
WEDNESDAY IN FRONT OF THE
JAPANESE EMBASSY IN SEOUL,
KOREA.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] WE
MUST FORCE OR SHAME JAPAN
TO GIVE REPARATION TO
THESE WOMEN WHOSE LIVES
THEY DESTROYED.
ALSO TO THEIR MEN WHO
SLAVED IN COAL MINES UNDER
HARSH AND RACIST
CONDITIONS AND ALSO HAVE
NOT BEEN COMPENSATED.
AND SHOULD REPARATION BE
WON, MAY IT SET AN
INTERNATIONAL LEGAL
PRECEDENT, THAT THE WORLD
WILL NEVER AGAIN ALLOW
FORCED SEXUAL SLAVERY AND
FORCED LABOR AND CRUEL AND
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT IN WAR TIME.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS] WHAT
MECHANISM DO WE USE BESIDE
THE RIGHT TO SPEAK OUT,
WRITE LEAFLETS, EMAIL,
MARCH AND DEMONSTRATE?
THE MOST POWERFUL WEAPON
FOR WE WOMEN OF COLOR IS
TRUTH.
GO OUT AND TELL
THE TRUTH EVERYWHERE.
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS]
[CROWD NOISES AND UPBEAT MUSIC
PLAYING]
FREE MUMIA, FREE MUMIA.
FREE MUMIA ABU-JAMAL!
YEAH!
FREE MUMIA, FREE MUMIA
FREE MUMIA ABU-JAMAL!
YEAH!
FREE MUMIA, FREE MUMIA
WELL, I THINK THE ONE
ISSUE THAT'S BRINGING
EVERYBODY TOGETHER IS
MUMIA.
MUMIA IS THE NEW MALCOLM,
I MEAN THEY CALLED HIM
"THE VOICE OF THE
VOICELESS" BECAUSE HE WAS
ALWAYS FOR THE UNDERDOG
WHETHER YOU ARE IN PRISON
OR OUT.
AND HE HAS A WAY OF
REACHING OUT TO ALL KINDS
OF PEOPLE, PEOPLE WHO HAD
NEVER BEEN IN THE MOVEMENT
BEFORE, BECAUSE HE
REPRESENTS ALL POLITICAL
PRISONERS.
AND POLITICAL PRISONERS
WERE THE ONES WHO WERE
COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS, WHO
WERE THE MOST VOCAL AND
THE MOST VISUAL.
- UMM HMM.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHY --
ONE OF THE REASONS WHY --
THE CAMPAIGN TO FREE MUMIA
IS SO IMPORTANT.
BUT ALSO LEARNING ABOUT
MUMIA PEOPLE ARE FINALLY
LEARNING ABOUT POLITICAL
PRISONERS IN GENERAL.
ONE OF THE GROUPS, WELL
AND WHOSE ALWAYS SUPPORTED
THE POLITICAL PRISONERS,
BUT WHO HAVE BEEN THE MOST
POLITICAL ARE THE WELL,
LESBIANS AND GAYS AND THE
YOU KNOW, QUEER NATION.
I MEAN, THEY HAVE
SUPPORTED BLACK POLITICAL
PRISONERS, THE PUERTO
RICANS, NATIVE AMERICANS
AND MANY OF THEM
WENT TO JAIL.
WELL, THEY ALL DID
A LOT OF WORK.
I WORK WITH AN
ORGANIZATION IN AUSTRALIA
CALLED SISTERS INSIDE, WHICH
FOCUSES ON WOMEN IN PRISON.
AND THAT'S A MULTI-RACIAL
ORGANIZATION, ABORIGINAL
PEOPLE, SOUTH ASIAN
PEOPLE, WHITE AUSTRALIANS.
AS THERE IS A
DISPROPORTIONATE NUMBER OF
BLACK PEOPLE AND LATINOS
IN PRISONS IN THE U.S.,
THERE'S A DISPROPORTIONATE
NUMBER OF ABORIGINAL PEOPLE.
BUT IT'S THE SAME THINGS
ALSO IN EUROPE.
WHO DO YOU FIND?
YOU FIND PEOPLE FROM
AFRICA, PEOPLE FROM ASIA
WHO ARE BEHIND BARS,
THAT'S THE POST-COLONIAL
SITUATION THERE.
AND WHAT I SUPPOSE
DISTURBS ME IS THAT WE
HAVEN'T FIGURED OUT HOW TO
BUILD A GLOBAL MOVEMENT SO
THAT WE CAN ALL LEARN FROM
EACH OTHER.
- AFFIRMATIVE ACTION,
IMMIGRANT RIGHTS,
SOVEREIGNTY FOR HAWAIIANS,
POLICE BRUTALITY, FIGHT
AGAINST HOMOPHOBIA, FIGHT
AGAINST RACIAL VIOLENCE,
AGAINST THE UNJUST U.S. BLOCKADE
OF CUBA.
TODAY, ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT ISSUES AND LONG
IGNORED IS THE SUPPORT FOR
POLITICAL PRISONERS RIGHT
HERE IN USA.
YOU MAY HAVE SUPPORTED
MANDELA AND OTHERS
ELSEWHERE IN THE WORLD,
BUT HERE WE HAVE SO MANY
POLITICAL PRISONERS AND
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
WILL NOT ADMIT
TO THEM.
WE HAVE HUNDREDS WHO
SHOULD BE RECOGNIZED AS
HEROES AND SHEROES.
[APPLAUSE] THEY ARE NOW
DOING 15 AND 20 YEARS
BEHIND THE WALL AND ARE
ALMOST FORGOTTEN.
[NATIVE-AMERICAN CHANTING]
THEY WERE ONCE COMMUNITY
ACTIVISTS IN THE BLACK
PANTHER PARTY, IN THE
REPUBLIC OF NEW AFRICA,
THE YOUNG LORDS, THE
PUERTO RICAN INDEPENDENCE
MOVEMENT, AMERICAN-INDIAN
MOVEMENT, WHITE
ANTI-IMPERIALIST GROUP
INCLUDING THE QUEER NATION
WHICH HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
STRONGEST SUPPORTERS FOR
POLITICAL PRISONERS.
THEY MUST NOT
BE FORGOTTEN.
THEY MUST BE RESURGED AND
YOU ARE THE ONES THAT MUST
BE THE ONES THAT CARRY THE
MESSAGES TO THE PEOPLE TODAY.
[ISLAMIC CALL TO PRAYER -
CHANTING] AND WE'VE HEARD
ABOUT ABU GHRAIB, WE'VE
HEARD ABOUT GUANTANAMO,
WE'VE HEARD ABOUT ALL OF
THE CIA SECRET PRISONS,
SUBJECT TO RENDITION SO
THAT THEY CAN BE TORTURED
IN COUNTRIES - UH HMM.
-- THAT ENGAGE IN THAT
PRACTICE, WHICH THEN
ALLOWS THE U.S.
TO WIPE ITS HANDS AND
ARGUE THAT, YOU KNOW,
TORTURE ISN'T A STRATEGY
THAT THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT [BOTH AT THE
SAME TIME] USES.
BUT WE KNOW THAT TORTURE
GOES ON IN DOMESTIC PRISONS.
- OF COURSE!
BUT I THINK WE'VE GOT TO
GIVE A LOT MORE ATTENTION
TO STOP U.S. WARS WHERE EVER.
I MEAN, DID YOU THINK THE
MOVEMENT AGAINST THE WAR
IS NOT AS POWERFUL AS IT
WAS AGAINST THE VIETNAM WAR?
YOU KNOW, ACTUALLY I THINK
THE SENTIMENT IS EVEN MORE
POWERFUL.
[PROTESTERS CHANTING]
"WHOSE STREETS?
OUR STREETS!"
"NO BLOOD FOR OIL!"
WHEN WE CONSIDER THAT OVER
THE LAST YEARS, WE'VE HAD
DEMONSTRATIONS THAT HAVE
BEEN SO MUCH LARGER THAN
ANY OF THE ANTI-VIETNAM
WAR DEMONSTRATIONS, IT'S
NOT SO MUCH THE FACT THAT
PEOPLE ARE LESS OPPOSED TO
WAR THAN THEY WERE THEN.
IT'S A QUESTION OF HOW WE
TRANSFORM THOSE SENTIMENTS
INTO OPPOSITIONAL
POLITICAL STANCES.
DO YOU THINK AMERICAN
PEOPLE REALIZE LIKE THAT
FIRST, A MILLION IRAQI
CIVILIANS HAVE BEEN KILLED?
[ISLAMIC CALL TO PRAYER -
CHANTING] AND I HEARD TWO
MILLION OR SO ARE REFUGEES
IN IRAQ.
AND THREE OR FOUR MILLION
HAD TO GO TO OTHER
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES.
THAT'S A LOT OF PEOPLE!
- WHEN PEOPLE WERE OPPOSED
TO THE WAR IN VIETNAM,
THERE SEEMED TO BE SOME
EMPATHY, SOME SENSE OF
IDENTIFICATION WITH
VIETNAMESE PEOPLE, WHEREAS
MANY PEOPLE WHO ARE
AGAINST THE WAR IN IRAQ
TODAY DON'T THINK ABOUT
IRAQI PEOPLE AT ALL.
- RIGHT, I MEAN -- AND
THERE IS NO -- THERE IS NO
- SENSE OF CONNECTION. - AH HA.
WHAT I THINK IS THAT THE
NATIONALISM -- [CROWD CHEERING]
-- U.S. NATIONALISM IS A MAJOR
OBSTACLE. - UMM HMM.
AND THERE IS A CONNECTION
BETWEEN THE PROLIFERATION
OF PRISONS AND PLACES OF
DETENTIONS INSIDE THE U.S.
AND THE EMERGENCE OF THE
PRISON AS THE MAIN FACE OF
THE U.S. DRIVE FOR EMPIRE.
AND THIS IS WHY I THINK
THAT ABOLITION -- LIKE
DEATH PENALTY ABOLITION,
PRISON ABOLITION IS SO
IMPORTANT. - UMM HMM.
A CHALLENGE FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE WHO ARE ACTIVE IN
THAT MOVEMENT IS TO CREATE
A VOCABULARY THAT WILL
ALLOW THEM TO PERSUADE
OTHER PEOPLE THAT THE
CAMPAIGN TO ABOLISH PRISONS
ISN'T ONLY ABOUT PRISONS.
IT'S ABOUT EDUCATION. - UMM HMM.
IT'S ABOUT HEALTH CARE,
IT'S ABOUT HOUSING, JOBS.
IT'S ABOUT AN
END TO RACISM.
- UMM HMM. RIGHT.
[APPLAUSE] WE CANNOT HOWEVER,
BE JUST TALKING TO OURSELVES.
THERE ARE MANY GROUPS AND
PEOPLE WE HAVE NOT APPROACHED.
WE MUST UTILIZE THE HELP
OF THE PROGRESSIVE
NEWSPAPERS, PROGRESSIVE
LAWYERS, PROGRESSIVE
TEACHERS, PROGRESSIVE
RADIO PROGRAMMERS,
PROGRESSIVE CHURCHES,
BECAUSE THERE MAY BE SOME
THAT ARE SINCERELY
INTERESTED.
[LAUGHTER] PROGRESSIVE
CIVIC ORGANIZATION,
PROGRESSIVE ETHNIC
COMMUNITIES AND HOPEFULLY
PROGRESSIVE HIP-HOPPERS.
[LAUGHTER, APPLAUSE
AND CHEERS].
I HAVE THIS QUOTE FROM
GEORGE JACKSON.
SOME WORDS OF WISDOM,
WARNING AND TRUTH.
HE SAID, "PRISON IS A
FRIGHTENING, PETRIFYING
DIFFUSION OF VIOLENCE AND
INTIMIDATION EMITTED FROM
THE WARDEN AND HIS CREW,
CONTROLLED BY ABSOLUTE TERROR.
EVERY DIRTY TRICK OF
DECEPTION AND BRUTALITY IS
EMPLOYED WITHOUT SHAME,
WITHOUT HONOR, WITHOUT
HUMANITY, WITHOUT
RESERVATION TO EITHER
CONVERT OR DESTROY
REBELLIOUS HARM.
BUT THE HISTORY OF
ACTIVISTS HAS SHOWN
FEARLESSNESS AND DARING."
[APPLAUSE AND CHEERS].
[RAP MUSIC PLAYING]
THIS IS THE CONNECTION
FROM PALESTINE TODAY. YEAH!
- YO, I SEE THINGS ON A
DIFFERENT LEVEL. UH!
BEIN' AN EFFICIENT REBEL.
I'M ON A MISSION TO CLAIM
YOUR VISION, SO LISTEN...
- ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
REALLY IMPRESSES ME ABOUT
YOU YURI, IS THE WAY IN
WHICH YOU HAVE LEARNED
- THAT NEW VOCABULARY AND --
WELL, YOU HAVE TO LEARN IT
IF YOU'RE IN THE MOVEMENT,
RIGHT?
[LAUGHS] MUSIC HAS ALWAYS
BEEN ONE OF THE STRONGEST
OF THE CULTURAL ARTS.
WHATEVER MUSIC IS POPULAR
IS ALMOST -- IS THE GOOD
INDICATION OF WHAT SOCIETY
IS GOING THROUGH AT THE TIME.
- YES, YES.
HIP-HOP AND ALL CULTURAL
STUFF, THEY ARE AT THE
FOREFRONT OF THE MOVEMENT
NOW! - YEAH!
[UPBEAT JAZZ MUSIC
PLAYING] ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS I THINK WITH THE
'60'S OR THE '70'S WAS THAT
MANY OF US HAD THIS VERY
RIGID IDEA ABOUT WHAT IT
MEANT TO BE A POLITICAL
ACTIVIST.
THERE WERE CERTAIN KINDS
OF TASKS ASSOCIATED WITH
POLITICAL ACTIVISM.
IF YOU DIDN'T GET OUT
THERE AND PASS OUT THE
LEAFLETS, OR YOU DIDN'T
COME TO ALL THE MEETINGS
- YES. RIGHT!
-[LAUGHS] IF YOU DIDN'T
SELL THE PAPERS - RIGHT, YES.
-- THEN YOU COULD NOT
COUNT YOURSELF AS A
- POLITICAL ACTIVIST. - RIGHT.
[LAUGHS] PEOPLE TENDED TO
SEE CULTURAL WORKERS AS
- KIND OF APPENDAGES TO A
POLITICAL ACTIVISM. - YES.
- RATHER THAN ACTIVISTS YES.
- THAT THEY PROVIDE THE
ENTERTAINMENT FOR US,
- RIGHT? - RIGHT.
[LAUGHS] THAT WE HAVE
THESE RALLIES IN WHICH THE
LEADERS GET UP AND GIVE
THE "POLITICAL LINE."
UH-HUH.
AND THEN THE MUSICIANS
COME UP AND THEY PROVIDE
US WITH SOME RELIEF --
YES, RIGHT.
[LAUGHS] OR THIS FILM IS
SHOWN, WHICH ALLOWS US TO
SORT OF RELAX FOR A MOMENT
-- YES.
-- SO THAT WE CAN GET BACK
TO THE "REAL WORK" OF
- DOING THE POLITICAL
ORGANIZING. - RIGHT.
IT MAKES ME THINK OF
SOMETHING THAT MALCOLM
SAID, "ABOUT THE BIGGEST
THREAT IS THE PERSON WHO
COULD COMMUNICATE."
AND MALCOLM HIMSELF WAS A
COMMUNICATOR AND HE BECAME
A THREAT.
YOUR HISTORY AND HOW YOU
BECAME CONSCIOUS OF THE
IMPORTANCE OF FIGHTING
RACISM AND INEQUALITY AND
INJUSTICE AND FIGHTING
AGAINST WAR, WE NEED TO
UNDERSTAND BETTER HOW THAT
HAPPENS, SO THAT IT'S NOT
-ACCIDENTAL.
-RIGHT, RIGHT, UH-HUH.
SO THAT WE CAN ACTUALLY
ENCOURAGE IT.
THE YOUTH HAS TO SEE THAT
THERE ARE MANY THINGS
GOING ON TODAY THAT ARE
WRONG AND IF THEY WANT TO
CHANGE IT, TO MAKE THE
FUTURE BETTER, THEY HAVE
TO BE THE ACTIVIST AND
PARTICIPATE.
ABSOLUTELY!
AND YOU KNOW, I THINK YOUR
HISTORY AS SOMEONE WHO HAS
ALWAYS ENCOURAGED
COMMUNITY BUILDING ACROSS
THE DIVISIONS THAT USUALLY
KEEP US APART -- OH YES!
THERE MUST BE THAT KIND OF
ALLIANCE, THAT KIND OF
GETTING TO KNOW ONE AND
ANOTHER BETTER AND DOING
THINGS TOGETHER!
OH, YES.
OKAY, SO WHERE DO YOU
THINK IT HAS TO BEGIN?
WELL, I THINK IT BEGINS
WHEREVER YOU ARE.
[LAUGHS] OH YEAH.
RIGHT, RIGHT.
I MEAN MY SENSE HAS ALWAYS
BEEN THAT ACTIVISM ISN'T
SOMETHING SPECIAL.
IT'S NOT LOCATED IN A
PARTICULAR SPACE.
OH, RIGHT.
IT'S ABOUT DOING THE WORK
YOU'RE ABLE TO DO --
RIGHT.
-- GIVEN THE POSITION
YOU'RE IN AT ANY GIVEN
MOMENT.
OR SOON AS YOU HEAR
SOMETHING LIKE, YOU'RE
JUST READING A NEWSPAPER
AND FINDING OUT SOME VERY
TERRIBLE STORY ABOUT
INJUSTICE THAT -- AND I
THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE EVEN
IMMEDIATELY RESPOND.
AND THEN IF THEY COULD
ACTUALLY -- ORGANIZING AND
GETTING MORE PEOPLE TO
RESPOND.
YOU ASK YOURSELF, YOU
KNOW, HOW WAS IT POSSIBLE
TO BUILD SUCH AN AMAZING
MOVEMENT AGAINST APARTHEID
IN SOUTH AFRICA?
UMM HMM.
SO I THINK THE REAL
CHALLENGE IS TO BUILD A
SENSE OF TRANSNATIONAL
COMMUNITY.
UMM HMM.
TRANSNATIONAL
SOLIDARITIES.
AND THEN PERHAPS OUR
EFFORT TO END THE WARS
AGAINST SO CALLED
"TERROR," THE WAR IN IRAQ
AND TO PREVENT A WAR IN
IRAN WILL HAVE A LOT MORE
-SUBSTANCE.
-UMM HMM.
WILL LEAD PEOPLE TO FEEL A
CONNECTION WITH THOSE WHO
ARE SUFFERING U.S. AGGRESSION
NOT SIMPLY TO SAY THIS
IS A THREAT TO U.S.
-DEMOCRACY.
-UMM HMM.
BUT THAT THIS HURTS MEN
AND WOMEN AND CHILDREN IN
WAYS THAT WE WOULD NEVER
WANT OUR FAMILY MEMBERS TO
-BE HURT.
-UH-HUH.
IT'S ABOUT HOW ONE
APPROACHES ONE'S COMMUNITY
AND IT'S ABOUT TEACHING
PEOPLE I THINK TO THINK
AND IMAGINE BEYOND THE
PRESENT MOMENT.
RIGHT.
AND NOT IMPRISONED IN THE
PRESENT.
YEAH.
WE ARE NOT PRISONERS OF
THIS EFFORT TO SPREAD WAR
THROUGHOUT THE WORLD. WE CAN
COME TOGETHER AND
BELIEVE IN AND STRUGGLE
FOR A BETTER WORLD.
UMM HMM.
AND I MEAN THE FUTURE DOES
BELONG TO THE YOUTH
BECAUSE THEY'RE THE ONLY
ONES THAT WOULD CHANGE
TOMORROW!
YEAH OKAY, SO...
YEAH.
SO THAT'S THE CHALLENGE,
RIGHT?
OKAY, RIGHT.
YEAH.
♪[MUSIC PLAYING]
[♪...]
[MUSIC FADES]